The Book presents the selected speeches of the 
Prime Minister Choudhary Charan Singh. 

When Shri Charan Singh took over the 
reins of the Government, many economic and 
social problems were hovering over the 
country’s scene, calling for immediate solution. 
He stood up to these challenges and strove to 
solve them. 

He was a Messiah of Kisans and 
championed their cause and the downtrodden. 
He had faith in Gandhian philosophy and 
believed that country’s public life can not be 
improved unless people at the top have 
personal integrity of a very high order. He 
endeavoured to generate a new atmosphere of 
hope and confidence amongst people in place 
of uncertainty, apprehension and despair. 

On International scene, he viewed that the 
country’s glorious heritage and tradition had 
a distinctive role in spreading the message of 
peace. He had unflinching belief in Non- 
alignment and non-interference in other’s 
affairs. 








Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
Public.Resource.Org 


https://archive.org/details/charansinghselecOOunse 







Choudhary Charan Singh 



CHARAN SINGH 


SELECTED SPEECHES 



CHARAN SINGH 


SELECTED SPEECHES 


July 1979—December 1979 


j 


PUBLICATIONS DIVISION 

MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 


May 1992 (Vaisakha 1914) 



© 


Price: Rs. 55.00 


PUBLISHED BY THE DIRECTOR PUBLICATIONS DIVISION 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
PATIALA HOUSE NEW DELHI-110001 


Sales Emporia # Publications Division 


SUPER BAZAR CONNAUGHT CIRCUS NEW DELHI-110001 
COMMERCE HOUSE CURRIMBHOY ROAD BALLARD PIER 
BOMBAY-400038 

8 ESPLANADE EAST CALCUTTA-700069 

LLA AUDITORIUM ANNASALAI MADRAS-600002 

BIHAR STATE CO-OPERATIVE BANK BUILDING ASHOKA RAJPATH PATNA-800004 
PRESS ROAD TRIVANDRUM-695001 
10-B STATION ROAD LUCKNOW-226019 

STATE ARCHAEOLOGICAL MUSEUM BUILDING PUBLIC GARDEN, 
HYDERABAD-500004 


PRINTED AT RAKESH PRESS, NEW DELHI-110028 




Contents 


REVIVE AND REINFORCE PEOPLE’S FAITH 

Broadcast to the Nation, New Delhi, 28 July 1979 1 

PLEDGE TO GO AHEAD 

Independence Day speech from the ramparts of the Red Fort, New Delhi, 

15 August 1979 5 

HEALTH: A TOP PRIORITY 

Speech at the inauguration of the National Conference on Medical and Health 

Education, New Delhi, 27 August 1979 12 

FARM MODERNISATION 

Speech while inaugurating International Crop Research Institute for the Semi- 

Arid. Tropics at Patancheru, Hyderabad, 30 August 1979 16 

OPERATION FLOOD PROGRAMME 

Speech at the inauguration of Operation Flood II and on the occasion of dedicating 

the Mother Dairy to milk Producers and Consumers, New Delhi, 02 September 1979 22 

COMMITMENT TO THE NAM 

Letter to the Cuban President Fidel Castro on the occasion of the Sixth Non- 

Aligned Movement Summit, New Delhi, 03 September 1979 26 

WEATHER BEHAVIOUR AND CROP PLANNING 

Valedictory address at ICAR Symposium, New Delhi, 06 September 1979 28 

HEALTH FOR ALL 

Inaugural address on the occasion of South-East Asia Regional Conference of 

WHO, New Delhi, 18 September 1979 33 

CURBS ON ECONOMIC OFFENDERS 

Speech while inaugurating Chief Ministers’ Conference, New Delhi, 

27 September 1979 38 

CHILDREN ARE NATION’S TREASURE 

Message on the Children’s Day, New Delhi, 14 November 1979 43 

ATOMIC ENERGY FOR DEVELOPMENT 

Address at the 23rd Session of the General Conference of the International 

Atomic Energy Agency, New Delhi, 04 December 1979 45 


MESSAGES AND TRIBUTES 


GREETINGS TO PAKISTAN 

Greetings to H.E. General Mohammed Zia-ul-Haq, President of the Islamic Republic 
of Pakistan on the occasion of Pakistan’s Independence Day, New Delhi, 

13 August 1979. 53 

SUCCOUR IN DISTRESS 

Condolence Message on the loss of life and property in Gujarat Floods, New Delhi, 

13 August 1979 54 

MOUNTBATTEN—A GREAT FRIEND 

Condolence Message to the British Prime Minister on the death of Lord Mountbatten, 

New Delhi, 27 August 1979 55 

JP—THE CONSCIENCE OF THE NATION 

Condolence Message on the death of Lok Nayak Jaya Prakash Narayan, 

New Delhi, 08 October 1979 56 

MOTHER TERESA—A GREAT PHILANTHROPIST 

Message on the occasion of conferment of the Nobel Peace Prize on Mother Teresa, 

New Delhi, 17 October 1979 58 

CELEBRATION OF 1400TH HIJRI NEW YEAR 

Message on the eve of the Hijri New Year, New Delhi, 20 November 1979 59 

THE HOCKEY WIZARD 

Message on the passing away of Major Dhyan Chand, New Delhi, 

03 December 1979 


61 


Preface 


The Book includes important speeches, broadcasts, tributes and 
messages of Shri Charan Singh during his Prime Ministership in 
1979. The speeches are arranged in chronological order. 



Revive and reinforce people’s faith 


I am speaking to you tonight as your first public servant. Today, 
some of my colleagues and I assumed the sacred responsibility of 
managing the nation's affairs. It shall be our collective endeavour 
to discharge this trust with sincerity and devotion. We are deeply 
conscious of the goodwill and affection our people have chosen to 
bestow on us. 

All of us are painfully aware of the fact that inspite of the best 
wishes of our leaders, our achievements in every sphere have fallen 
far short of the expectations of our people. Thirty years after 
Independence we are almost amongst the poorest countries in the 
world. 

Our poverty has to be eliminated and the basic necessities of life 
made available to every single citizen. Political leadership of the 
country must remember that nothing mocks our values and dreams 
more than the desperate struggle of our people for existence. 
Nothing could, therefore be more poignant than the look of 
despair in the eyes of a starving child. Nothing could therefore, be a 
more patriotic objective for our political leaders than to ensure that 
no child will go to bed hungry, that no family will fear for its next 
day’s bread and that the future and capacities of not a single Indian 
will be allowed to be stunted by mal-nutrition. 


Broadcast to the Nation, New Delhi, 28 July 1979 



2 


CHARAN SINGH: SELECTED SPEECHES 


Unemployment is on the increase. There can not be a greater 
misery than those young men fully qualified and wanting gainful 
employment, find themselves idle. We have to find employment for 
all of them. Indeed, employment should be the principal 
instrument with which poverty has to be eliminated. Elimination of 
unemployment will, therefore, be accorded the highest priority in 
programmes and policies of my Government. 

Disparities of income and wealth have widened over the years. 
There is a yawning economic and cultural gulf between our cities 
and villages. This dangerous trend has to be checked. My 
Government will initiate steps to prevent the growth of cities 
beyond certain limits. 

For a country like ours with its endemic economic and social 
problems, there is no escape except to encourage by every possible 
means, the establishment of small economic units both in industry 
and in agriculture. This does not mean that my Government has 
any reservations about the role of big industries as a matter of 
principle. Whenever necessary, big industries will continue to be 
established and, wherever national interest so demands, they will 
be established in the public sector. Not only that, in special cases 
even existing private industry will be nationalised. 

At the same time, this Government realizes that in as much as 
corruption starts at the top and, percolating down, corrupts the 
whole society. Unless there is a high degree of personal integrity at 
the top level, in the public life of our country, corruption in 
administration cannot possibly be stamped out or even 
substantially reduced. Although the ultimate solution lies in the 
hands of the people themselves who have the right to choose their 
leaders, the Government will take all necessary steps in this regard. 

Interested parties have spread various rumours about me and 
my colleagues. These tend to create apprehensions about 
imposition of Hindi on unwilling sections of our people and justice 
not being meted out to minorities, and other weaker sections of our 
society. This propaganda is an unmitigated lie. 

All backward classes, weaker sections and minorities, scheduled 
castes and tribes shall be ensured all protection and help to develop 


CHARAN SINGH: SELECTED SPEECHES 


3 


themselves to the optimum so that they play a rightful role in 
society. 

Government will ensure maximum opportunities to all 
minorities for development—economic, religious and cultural— 
and strive for their effective integration within the Indian society. 

Every language shall be given the maximum opportunity for 
development. No language shall be imposed on any section of the 
society against its will, although it is this Government’s fond hope 
that in time, an acceptable lingua franca will develop. 

The country is today facing a grave crisis. It is not ordinary times 
that we are living in. Our people are fast getting disenchanted. At 
this critical moment, our first task is to revive and reinforce the 
people’s faith in a bright future. 

Increasing prices have made our people apprehend the approach 
of an economic crisis. I want to assure the people that Government 
will take every possible steps to meet the situation. We have a huge 
stock of food in Government warehouses and ample foreign 
reserves to meet any contingency. Inefficiency in production of 
coal, power, steel and cement, movement of railways, clearance of 
goods in the ports and deterioration of industrial relations will be 
dealt with a sympathetic but a stern hand. 

The general law and order situation is showing signs of strain. 
The creeping sense of restlessness amongst the people for this score 
will be effectively checked. 

Above all, we have to restore in the minds of our people, their 
confidence in the capacity and resilience of our democratic polity 
to solve our multifarious problems. A new atmosphere of hope has 
to be created in the country in place of the present state of uncer¬ 
tainty, apprehension and despair. 

Ideological differences may be difficult to resolve overnight. But 
a unity based on values and national objectives is the imperative 
need of our time. 

In the comity of nations, India with its glorious heritage and 
tradition has a distinctive role to play. It has to spread the message 
of peace and apply the healing touch at every sore spot. 


4 


CHARAN SINGH: SELECTED SPEECHES 


I may add that in the sphere of foreign affairs, my Government 
will continue to follow a policy of non-alignment which will not 
lean on any super power. 

India is a rich country, blessed by nature, and with people of 
great culture, traditions, skills and capacity for hard and sustained 
work. It would be my privilege and duty to serve all sections of the 
people of this country and to do whatever is possible to strengthen 
the moral and economic strength of the country and to improve the 
quality of life. 


Pledge to go ahead 


W E are today celebrating the thirty second anniversary of our 
Independence. It was through the sacrifice and endeavour of 
Mahatma Gandhi and other leaders that the country won its 
Independence after 200 years of British rule. On this occasion, it is 
proper that we pay our homage to the Father of the Nation and 
other colleagues. However, just paying homage will not be enough. 

The recent change in the Central Government was brought 
about in a peaceful and democratic manner. A variety of things are 
said by people in this regard. They say this is an SVD Government 
and ask how will it run? But I would like to tell you that the Janata 
Government also was an SVD Government. It had one label and 
yet it was an SVD Government with many constituents. 1 would 
not go into details but would only mention that some persons tried 
to discard the ladder with the help of which they had stepped up to 
the seat of power. I had publicly expressed my disagreement with 
my closest ally, Shri Raj Narain, on 24th of June. But the events 
that took place after that forced me and my colleagues to leave that 
SVD Government. Today, the Congress, the Janata (S) and our 
friends in the Socialist Party, the Peasants and Workers Party of 
Maharashtra and the Communist Party members, who had 
expressed themselves in favour of this Government in the last week 
of July, together have a strength of 200 and more; call it SVD or 


Independence Day speech from the ramparts of the Red Fort, New Delhi, 15 August 1979 



6 


CHARAN SINGH: SELECTED SPEECHES 


what you like. The day, the other people or the parties or leaders 
are able to form a larger party and challenge us and the moment we 
feel that we are in a minority, we will not hesitate even for a minute 
to step down. 

I and my colleagues do not want a mid-term poll which is very 
expensive and creates lot of problems. But I think, no party wants a 
mid-term poll. If, however, we have to go in for one, we will come 
to you to seek your vote and confidence. I have every hope that in 
that event, the Congress, the Janata(S) and other partners, I have 
mentioned, will be able to form a united party which will be able to 
secure majority throughout the country. 

Among the number of problems facing this country, the most 
serious is poverty. Of the 125 nations of the world, our position is 
111th which means that there are 110 countries which are more 
affluent than us. Three years ago, our position was 104th and 
during this period we have slided down to the 111th position. This 
speaks of the level of our poverty. 

The second problem is of unemployment. From the time the 
Janata Party took up the reins of power, 25 lakh more young 
unemployed have registered their names with the Employment 
Exchanges. Unemployment thus is on the increase. In the rural 
areas, both the educated and uneducated are unemployed. In the 
cities too, the educated unemployed are on the streets. Therefore, 
we have to eradicate unemployment. 

The third problem, we face in the economic field is the growing 
disparity between the poor and the affluent. This disparity existed 
even at the time of the British. In a small measure, this disparity 
exists everywhere and it will be impossible to erase it completely. 
But that Government alone will be considered good which 
minimises this disparity instead of letting it increase further. Since 
Independence, in our country the gap between the rich and the 
poor has increased and economic power is getting concentrated in 
the hands of a few people. 

Besides, social tensions also persist. I would not like to go into 
the reasons for this. But the poor, the Harijans and the weaker 
sections are not feeling secure. The minorities, that is the followers 


CHARAN SINGH: SELECTED SPEECHES 


7 


of religions other than Hindu, have also begun to sense similar 
tension. The reasons may be historic and need not be elaborated 
just now. It will be the endeavour of this Government to eliminate 
the root causes of these continuing tensions and establish peace 
and prosperity in the country. We will be deemed to have 
succeeded only if no communal riots are reported for one year or 
for the tenure of this Government. 

Friends, one immediate problem before us is price rise. In the 
last two Five Year Plans, investment for cement, coal and power 
production was meagre and in the last six months of the Janata 
Government, that is from January to June 1979, these sectors were 
handled indifferently. Coal, power, rail movement are critical 
sectors which have an impact on the total economy. In addition, 
there have been strikes and ships held-up at ports unloaded for as 
long as one month and even 45 days. The result of all this has been 
the rise in price level. This Government and my colleagues in the 
Departments will make every effort to see that production 
increases. They will not be confining themselves to Delhi, they will 
go to the power plants and to the coal mines. 

As long as production does not increase and the prices keep 
going up, this country will never be able to progress. 

Another thing to be noted is that the prices of even such 
commodities as foodgrains etc., which are not in short supply are 
also increasing. In this connection I would appeal to the retail and 
wholesale traders that they should desist from being greedy and 
earning profits which will only hurt our people and our country. 
We are determined not to allow black-marketing and profiteering 
that has continued so far; we will not permit it to continue further. 

Friends, all of us know which sections of our people deserve 
Government help most. But before I go into that, I would like to 
tell that despite the rise in prices of certain commodities, we are not 
short of foodgrains; our warehouses are full and for that, we should 
be grateful to the farmers. The farmers will continue to work hard, 
even if the rainfall is scanty or there is no rain. Therefore, so far as 
foodgrains are concerned, the country will not face any shortage. 
Another silver lining is that we have no shortage of foreign 
exchange and this can help us import things needed by the country. 


8 


CHARAN SINGH: SELECTED SPEECHES 


I was referring to the sections which deserve greater attention 
from the Government—the harijans, the tribals, the landless, the 
unemployed or underemployed and 50 per cent of our farmers who 
have got an hectare or less of land. These poorer sections have so 
far been neglected and the Government will pay special attention to 
them. According to the latest estimates of the Planning 
Commission, 48 per cent of those living below the poverty line are 
in the villages and 41 per cent in the towns. These are the ones, who 
do not get even frugal meals to feed themselves. You can ask a 
question as to why there is hunger when our silos are full of 
foodgrains. The reason is that they do not have the purchasing 
power. Even if there is plenty of food around, a man will remain 
hungry if he does not have the money to buy it. Therefore, the 
Government will pay the utmost attention to the poor and the 
hungry, 41 per cent of whom live behind the big palaces and 
bungalows in the cities and 48 per cent of whom live in the villages. 
If we can not give them the attention they deserve, the Government 
will not be fit to remain in power. 

It will be our endeavour that everyone in the country finds 
employment. For this, we have to pay special attention for 
increasing agricultural production and establishing cottage and 
village industries. When the Britisher’s came here first, 25 per cent 
of our population was engaged in such industries. Today, despite 
big plants and factories, only 9 per cent of the population is 
engaged in industries. Therefore, despite lakhs of cars and large 
number of skyscrapers in Bombay and Delhi and the number of 
people who have televisions and radio sets, I feel that we are today, 
poorer and weaker than the time of Jahangir and Aurangzeb. 

To my friends in the cities, I would say that I am not inclined to 
answer the criticism appearing in the newspapers or the comments 
that various people make. I would like to say only that trade, 
transport and industries can develop only when there is purchasing 
power with the people. If the villagers, the unemployed and the 
poor do not have the purchasing power, our industries will not be 
able to develop and the country will not be able to attain affluence. 
Only that country is considered affluent which has a larger 
percentage of people engaged in non-agricultural occupations. In 



CHARAN SINGH: SELECTED SPEECHES 


9 


our country, however, only 10 per cent of the population was 
engaged in industries in 1951 and this percentage remained static in 
1961 and again in 1971. Industry cannot grow unless agriculture 
also develops. There is no other way. We will, therefore, attempt to 
encourage cottage and village industries in the rural areas. 

Our womenfolk today break stones on the roads. What were 
their forefathers engaged in? They were independently engaged in 
small industries or were craftsmen. These crafts were lost during 
the time of British and we too continue to be indifferent in this 
respect. Our emphasis, therefore, will be to establish cottage 
industries in the villages. We will also strive to increase farm 
production. It will also be our endeavour to assist the rural people 
to diversify to other occupations because prosperity cannot be 
achieved if majority of our people continue to depend on land. 

I would like to draw your attention as well as the attention of my 
colleagues and public workers to the teachings of Mahatma 
Gandhi. Mahatmaji used to say that “ends don’t justify means”. It 
is as though you can adopt any means to achieve your objectives, 
howsoever noble. To be able to achieve noble objectives, your 
means should also be equally noble. You, and especially the public 
workers and all of us should keep in mind this advice; otherwise we 
will not be able to root out corruption. Corruption knows no 
bounds. A country where people are corrupt, will never be able to 
progress whosoever may be the leader of the party or whatever be 
the sound programme he might follow. 

Mahatmaji also used to say that for a public worker, there is no 
private life different from his public life. To him, life is one and 
there is no compartmentalisation. If man’s public life is not clean, 
you can well imagine, his private life cannot be any better either 
and he cannot truely serve the country. 

The third thing, Gandhiji always emphasised and which we have 
tended to forget, is that “rights flow out of duties well performed”. 
All around, you will find people asserting their rights, their 
demands to secure better wages and allowances. This is all right. It 
is necessary that people should have their rights but their rights 
emerge from their duties and responsibilities. How do we get our 


10 


CHARAN SINGH: SELECTED SPEECHES 


rights if we do not carry out our duties? There is need for hard work 
and enterprise. If you want to be prosperous, you will have to put in 
hard work. You will pardon me, if I say that we are not prepared to 
put in hard work. If you look at the other countries, you will find 
that people start working in their factories, schools and offices at 8 
in the morning till 5 in the evening, getting a break of 40 minutes in 
between. There are very few strikes. The emphasis there on 
demands is much less. In Japan, if a worker is annoyed, he only 
bears a black band on his arm and does not think in terms of 
striking work. 

If other countries have become prosperous, it is because they 
have shown greater endeavour and enterprise. We want to earn 
more, have all the comforts and enjoy life without having to pay the 
price for it, without which nothing really in this world can be 
obtained, either by a person or by a nation. If the West today is 
more affluent, if Japan and Israel where the cows living in arid 
land, still give the world’s best milk yield, are prosperous, it is 
because of the hard work and enterprise of these countries. If our 
country is to progress, we will have to put in hard work and show 
enterprise and when I say that, I include myself and my ministers. 
Only through our ceaseless hard work will this country be able to 
advance. 

Coming to the foreign policy, we continue to adhere to the old 
policy of not aligning ourselves with any particular bloc. This will 
continue to be our policy because we consider it to be beneficial to 
the country—we will not be particularly inclined towards any 
country however big it might be. We believe that in the world, 
peace can be achieved and people can find happiness only by 
following the preachings of Mahatma Gandhi. If not today, the 
world will reach same conclusion the day after tomorrow. 

So far as the countries of South Asia are concerned, our 
relations with them have improved, barring some cases, where too, 
we hope, there will be improvement in our relations. 

In this connection I would like to mention our neighbour, 
Pakistan whose people, till the other day, were part of us. Our 
information is that Pakistan is trying to manufacture nuclear 



CHARAN SINGH: SELECTED SPEECHES 


bomb. Against whom are they making this bomb? They are friends 
with China; and with Russia they have no disputes. As for 
Afghanistan, it is a small country and Pakistan has no disputes 
with it either. If, therefore, I and my colleagues as also my 
countrymen reach the conclusion that this bomb is aimed at us, is 
aimed at India, then our conclusion will not be far from the truth. 

It has been our decision and it remains our decision so far that we 
do not want to manufacture nuclear bombs, or join the race for 
nuclear weapons. However, if Pakistan sticks to its decision and 
continues in its efforts to manufacture the bomb or stockpiling of 
these bombs, I and my colleagues will probably be forced to 
reconsider the entire question. 

With these words, I would like to appeal all those democratic 
forces, who believe in secularism, to cast aside their petty 
differences, and come forward to help me and my colleagues and 
my Government. 


Health: A Top Priority 


I feel honoured that you have invited me today to inaugurate 
this important Conference. As I was listening to Shri Rabi Ray, it 
occurred to me that whereas man has today acquired the ability to 
walk in outer space, here on earth he has not been able to take care 
of himself. The modern doctor has got entangled in the web which 
he has himself created. Medical education, as we have inherited 
and developed it, is a part of this system. It is acquiring 
sophistication day by day taking man to new heights; it is 
simultaneously making the ground slippery under his feet. 

The Indian situation in this regard is perhaps no different from 
the situation in some of the other developing countries. I am not 
against sophistication. Nor am I against expertise travelling from 
one place to another. The world is but one large family. But if this 
leads to neglect of the situation at home, if it does not lead to 
alleviation of misery for our people, we have to pause and think 
whether the direction in which we are going is the direction in 
which we ought to be going. 

To my mind this direction has to be changed and changed 
drastically. The whole system has to be changed. My heart lives in 
villages because it is there that India lives. And I cannot 
contemplate with equanimity the spectacle of the widening gap 


Speech at the inauguration of the National Conference on Medical and Health 
Education, New Delhi, 27 August 1979 



CHARAN SINGH: SELECTED SPEECHES 


13 


between the village and the city, between man and man. A system 
that imparts medical education to boys and girls for cities alone, 
and for foreign lands, has to be modified. It has to take cognizance 
of the conditions existing in the country as a whole; it has to give 
greater importance to the positive aspects of health and prevention 
of disease as compared to cure or treatment of disease. It has to 
participate actively in the spread of health education and it has to 
become a part of the cultural ethos of the people from whose 
investment it has acquired a major part of its strength. 

To me, health has got four components—physical, emotional, 
intellectual and spiritual. It is my plea that it should be promoted as 
such. I do not understand why health education has not been 
included in the educational system so far. Whatever be the causes 
responsible for this situation, we have to tackle them, and remove 
them. For those who are denied the benefit of formal education 
through schools and colleges, health education through other 
media should be given considerably greater importance. 

It is unfortunate that in our country, growth of the human 
personality has been divorced from economic progress. Somehow 
in the process of planning, man for whom planning is intended, has 
not been given a place in the front row. We have made huge 
investments in steel plants and heavy factories which produce 
machines to make more machines. We take pride in the fact that we 
have made rapid progress in industrialisation and from the point of 
view of technology, we are ahead of many other countries. I share 
this pride. I am all for the advancement of science and technology. 
But at the same time it is a matter of deep regret that programmes 
which can be construed as direct investment in man, programmes 
like education and health, have not been given their due 
importance. I share Shri Rabi Ray’s view that health should 
occupy a higher place in the national order of priorities. 

A little while ago, I talked of villages. I must pay my 
compliments to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for the 
new health scheme which they have introduced there. 1 am told that 
more than one lakh Community Health Volunteers are already 
functioning under the scheme in as many villages and all of them 
are non-officials. This is a measure of far-reaching importance. It is 


14 


CHARAN SINGH; SELECTED SPEECHES 


an excellent example of community participation in a major 
development programme. It has given concrete shape to the 
concept of planning from below. I am all praise for the Health 
Ministry for what it has been trying to achieve. But I must say at the 
same time that much more needs to be done in the rural areas, not 
just in the sphere of health but in all other fields. 

When there is a power break-down in Delhi or in Calcutta there 
are screaming headlines in the newspapers. Similarly, when there is 
a failure of water supply in the capital, tempers are aroused. This is 
as it should be. It is normal for people to feel agitated when they are 
denied the facilities to which they are entitled and accustomed to. 
But one might as well ask—how are people in villages living 
without these facilities? Why don’t we think of them? There are 
lakhs of villages where there is no electricity and no clean drinking 
water even. It is wrong for anyone to assume that people living in 
villages will continue to rest content with their present lot. Their 
interest demands, and the national interest demands, that 
elementary facilities which are available in cities must be extended 
to all villages. In the field of health, the Community Health 
Volunteers must be backed by an adequate network of primary 
health centres and sub-centres. And these centres and sub-centres 
must be manned by people whose education is in tune with the 
needs of those whom they are paid to serve. If future planning 
ignores this vital aspect of our national life, it will be repugnant to 
all theories of democracy and welfare. 

All of you hold high positions in your disciplines. I am not 
competent to advise you on the kind of modifications which should 
be brought about in the present system of medical education. But I 
reiterate my fervent plea that whatever decisions you take, must be 
related to our needs—the needs of our masses. If it means some 
scaling down of technology, if it means designing a new short-term 
course for medical personnel, we should not hesitate to take 
decisions to that effect. 

Shri Rabi Ray has referred to the problem of population 
explosion. I agree with him that it is one of the principal problems 
facing India today. It is making a mockery of our efforts to make 
life better for ourselves and for our children. Of course, the 


CHARAN SINGH: SELECTED SPEECHES 


15 


problem is largely linked with the problem of poverty. Both have to 
be tackled simultaneously. If we do not arrest the growth in our 
numbers, we cannot bring about any appreciable reduction in 
poverty. On the other hand, poverty is bound to increase further if 
there is no check on population growth. We have to bring this 
home to every family in fhe country. There has to be a massive 
programme to motivate the people to accept family planning as a 
way of life. Shri Rabi Ray’s Ministry has launched such a 
programme and I wish it all success. To this conference, I would 
like to say that doctors who command greater respect in the 
community than others, including politicians like Shri Rabi Ray 
and myself, should take the lead in making the family planning 
movement more effective. They come in contact with millions of 
patients and their relatives every day. If, while administering 
medicines to them, they can also talk to them about family 
planning and induce them to accept it, they will be doing a great 
service to them as well as to the nation as a whole. The subject of 
family planning is already included in medical education. I do hope 
that it is taught keeping in view all its current dimensions, and its 
immediate relevance to national life. I am grateful to the Union 
Health Minister for giving me an opportunity to talk to you today. 
I am sure that sound and well-considered recommendations for the 
reorientation and re-structuring of medical and health education 
will emerge as a result of your deliberations. 


Farm Modernisation 


1 have great pleasure in participating .in this function which 
marks the completion of the construction of the laboratory and 
other essential facilities for the scientists working at this Institute. I 
would like to congratulate the ICRISAT Board, Director and 
Staff, the Andhra Pradesh Government and all others concerned 
on this accomplishment. I am sure that with such magnificent 
facilities, the scientists of ICRISAT will be able to fulfil the role 
that has been assigned to them viz. to generate technologies which 
can help to elevate and stabilise crop production in the Semi-Arid 
Tropics. 

The crops you have chosen for your research as well the farming 
systems included in your mandate are important for the welfare of 
our rural population. Over 70 per cent of the cultivated area in 
India is dependent upon rainfall for raising crops. In fact, 
whenever rainfall failed in the past, there used to be no agriculture 
and hence there was also no employment. The result was 
widespread hunger and famine. After India became Independent, 
we have been able to successfully avoid famines and starvation 
deaths as was witnessed in Bengal during World War II. We now 
operate a “Food for Work” programme, which is unique in its 
kind. 


Speech while inaugurating the International Crop Research Institute for the Semi-Arid 
Tropics at Patancheru, Hyderabad, 30 August 1979 




Broadcasting to the Nation, 28 July 1979 











In conversation with Shri Raj Narain and Shri Biju Patnaik 



Senator Charles Percy of the United States calling on the Prime Minister, 
New Delhi, 8 August 1979 


















At work in office, August 1979 
















Inaugurating a self-employment Training Camp for Rural Youth organised by 
the Delhi Administration, 15 August 1979 










With the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs of Egypt, H.E. Dr. Boutros Ghali, 
New Delhi, 17 August 1979 











With Mr. P. Y. Strautmanis, Vice-President of USSR, 
New Delhi, 18 August 1979 



Opening the National Medical and Health Conference, 29 August 1979 















Delivering inaugural address at the International Crop Research Institute, 
Hyderabad, 30 August 1979 



At the Govind Ballabh Pant Jay anti celebration New Delhi, 10 September 1979 






















Signing the Condolence Book for Earl Mountbatten at the British High 
Commission, New Delhi, 5 September 1979 






CHARAN SINGH: SELECTED SPEECHES 


17 


New technology, which can help farmers to mitigate the adverse 
impact of aberrant weather on crop production, is an urgent need 
of the Semi-Arid Tropics. It is only after 1930 that experimental 
stations were started by the Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research to develop improved techniques of dry farming. These 
techniques did not have the desired impact since the improvements 
brought about were marginal and the risks were still high. 
However, during the last eight years, scientists of the Dry Land 
Farming Research Project of the Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research have been able to develop integrated techniques of soil 
and water conservation for short duration and drought-avoiding 
crop varieties, and methods for better plant protection and plant 
nutrition. These are now being tested in pilot development blocks. 

Inspite of these efforts, it is clear that we need a larger and more 
intensive inter-disciplinary attack on the complex problems of 
semi-arid and rainfed agriculture. It was, therefore, an act of vision 
on the part of FAO, UNDP, World Bank and other Members of 
the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research 
that they decided in 1972 to establish this Institute here at 
Hyderabad. The results achieved by the scientists of this Institute 
within a span of seven years demonstrate the power of science to 
find solutions to complex problems. ICRISAT is an example of the 
value of international and inter-disciplinary collaboration in 
agricultural science. The crops you have chosen for investigation 
such as jowar, bajra, groundnut, gram and pigeon pea or arhar are 
important both to the economy of our country and the nutrition of 
our population. Dry farming areas contribute over 50 per cent of 
our food production and over 75 per cent of the production of 
cotton, groundnut and pulses. It is of interest that although these 
crops now occupy such an important place in Indian agriculture, 
they are all not native to India; they have come from other 
continents, and particularly from Africa. Thus, agriculturists have 
from time immemorial never recognised political and geographical 
boundaries. Man has domesticated and used all plants which are of 
value to him irrespective of their place of origin. I am glad that 
scientists have emulated this example and have come together from 
different parts of the world and established a working partnership 
at this Centre. Mahatma Gandhi advised us to keep our windows 


18 


CHARAN SINGH: SELECTED SPEECHES 


and doors open so that fresh air and new ideas may come from all 
sides. The work of ICRISAT exemplifies the wisdom underlying 
this advice. 

While India is making progress in improving the production of 
cereals like wheat and rice, we have not been able to make similar 
progress in increasing the production of pulses and oilseeds. We 
are, therefore, anxious to step up the pace of progress in increasing 
the production of groundnut, grams and arhar crops on which 
ICRISAT is doing research. Our Agriculture Ministry has been 
working on a strategy for popularising improved technological 
packages in major pulses and oilseeds through a National 
Minimum Yield Guarantee Programme in these crops. The aim is 
to achieve growth with stability and insulate farmers from risks 
beyond human control. In this context, I am happy to learn that 
the ICRISAT Board has set up a Special Committee to deal with 
problems of technology transfer. We shall welcome whatever help 
you can give us in improving the production of pulses and oilseeds. 
The Indian Council of Agricultural Research is setting up a 
National Research Centre for Groundnut at Junagarh in Gujarat 
State. I hope this Centre and ICRISAT can together develop high 
yielding varieties of groundnut soon. 

I understand that your mandate covers the semi-arid areas of not 
only Asia but also Africa and Latin America. All these countries 
have farming systems which are several thousand years old. While 
modernising these systems, it should be remembered that not all 
the earlier practices have to be discarded. Some of them are 
particularly suited to local climatic and soil conditions. Therefore, 
instead of discarding such practices, it is important that they are 
improved in such a manner that the retention of moisture and 
growth of seedlings can be promoted. 

Nor should modernisation of agriculture automatically imply 
mechanisation. In countries like India, where generation of 
opportunities for gainful employment is the most challenging task, 
whatever mechanisation or modernisation of agriculture is 
necessary, it should lead to labour diversification and reduction of 
drudgery rather than to labour displacement. 

I would like to enumerate, particularly for the information of 


CHARAN SINGH: SELECTED SPEECHES 


19 


those who have come from outside the country, some of the steps 
we have recently taken here in India to promote agricultural 
growth with stability of production in unirrigated areas. First of 
all, we have expanded our efforts in the area of irrigation and 
particularly minor irrigation. We have introduced liberal subsidies 
for ground water exploitation both through individual and 
community tubewells, and for water harvesting through individual 
and community farm ponds. We have made farmers owning upto 4 
hectares eligible for subsidy for ground water utilisation. Secondly, 
we have introduced a National Programme for the construction of 
rural godowns to store and market farm produce. Farmers in the 
dry farming regions of India are poorer than those living in 
irrigated areas. Consequently, they have little capacity to hold on 
to farm produce after harvest. They tend to sell immediately after 
harvest, grains like jo war, bajra and pulses, at a low price—even 
lower than the support price announced by the Government. It is 
hoped the National Grid of Rural Grain Storage, which we are now 
promoting, would help to insulate poor farmers from exploitation 
and from distress sales. I consider that producer-oriented 
marketing is the key to stimulating scientific agriculture. 

Thirdly, we have started from August 15, this year, a National 
Programme of Training Rural Youth for Self-Employment in 
various sectors of agriculture and agro-industries. Under this 
Training Programme, we wish to impart relevant skills to at least 
200,000 rural boys and girls each year through the technique of 
“learning by doing”. I hope ICRISAT can also lend a helping hand 
to this programme. Finally, through various programmes like the 
Small Farmers’ Development Agency, Drought Prone Area 
Programme, Desert Area Development Programme and Integrated 
Rural Development Programme, we have introduced variety of 
services to farmers. I am, therefore, confident that, if economically 
viable technological packages become available, our farmers will 
convert unirrigated areas into productive farming ones. 

The year 1972 when the Institute was established, was 
characterised by abnormal monsoon behaviour and drought. This 
year again, when the ICRISAT Centre is being inaugurated, the 
behaviour of South-West monsoon has been abnormal. Therefore, 


20 


CHARAN SINGH: SELECTED SPEECHES 


you have a wonderful opportunity to assess critically during this 
season, the impact of your research, particularly since Andhra 
Pradesh is one of the States affected by severe drought. 

Some parts of North India have been affected by floods as well as 
drought. We also had flash floods in the Luni River Basin of the 
arid areas of Rajasthan, and also more recently in the Morvi area 
of Gujarat. Floods and drought, cyclones, and hail-storms cause 
untold hardship to people as well as damage to crops and animal 
husbandry. We have streamlined procedures of disaster 
preparedness and introduced a three-pronged strategy for 
achieving stability of production at the national level. The major 
components of this strategy are: (i) the introduction of crop life¬ 
saving techniques, including water conservation and recycling; (ii) 
the introduction of alternative crops based on contingency plans to 
suit different weather conditions; and (iii) the initiation of 
compensatory production programmes in irrigated areas and in 
non-traditional seasons. For example, the area under jute in West 
Bengal and Assam went down this year due to lack of rains upto the 
middle of June. I am, however, happy that Andhra Pradesh has 
come to the rescue by increasing the area under mesta by over 30 
per cent. This is one of the advantages of tropical and sub-tropical 
agriculture, where due to the abundance of sunlight throughout the 
year several crops can be grown. Scientists should help to perfect 
the crop yield stabilisation or strategy. From the side of 
Government, I can only assure you that as soon as you develop 
technologies which are economically stable and rewarding, we will 
take steps to pass on the benefits to our farmers through 
appropriate packages of services and public policies. 

I offer my best wishes to the Director and Staff of ICRISAT for 
continued success in the work of this Institute. I am glad that you 
have chosen this occasion for organising an International 
Symposium on “The Development and Transfer of Technology for 
Rainfed Agriculture”. Exchange of ideas among scientists from 
different countries should lead to fruitful results. I shall look 
forward to reading the recommendations of your Symposium. Ii 
regional imbalances in economic advancement are to be remedied 
in India, unirrigated agriculture must receive the greatest priority 


CHARAN SINGH: SELECTED SPEECHES 


21 


in the attention of both scientists and extension workers. I hope, 
the establishment of ICRISAT in India leading to interaction 
among scientists of many different countries, will open up a new 
era of hope and progress for the rainfed farmer. 


Operation Flood Programme 


1 am very happy to know that the representatives of the 
international and Indian organisations which have helped to build 
up the Delhi Mother Dairy and put through the Operation Flood 
Programme, are gathered here today. It is a good augury that Mr. 
Vogel, Executive Director of the World Food Programme and a 
number of representatives of farmer-producer families should be 
here when the second phase of the Operation Flood is to commence 
formally. 

The Operation Flood Programme has been able to build up a 
good link between the milk producer in the village and the urban 
consumer. In the process, it has captured a good share of the milk 
markets in four cities of Bombay, Calcutta, Delhi and Madras, 
developed transport between the cities and the areas from which 
milk is supplied, strengthened storage arrangements, provided 
technical assistance to farmers to improve yields and milch 
animals. It has helped to create an awareness among the farmers of 
the need to form co-operation to help each other and avoid 
exploitation by middlemen. It has definitely helped many 
consumers in the cities to get milk in good condition and at fair 
prices with regularity and in different forms to suit their 
preferences and needs. 


Speech at the inauguration of the Operation Flood II and on the occasion of dedicating 
the Mother Dairy to milk Producers and Consumers, New Delhi, 2 September 1979 



CHARAN SINGH: SELECTED SPEECHES 


23 


The objectives of Operation Flood in the first phase were quite 
laudable, and, as we can see, most of them have been satisfied in 
some measure. Over a million milk producers have come to the 
fore. Today, we have learnt more of the skills connected with 
procurement, transport and distribution of milk. The very process 
of commercialisation of the operation of milk producers, 
particularly the smaller producers, has forced them to devote more 
attention to better management of their livestock, its feed, upkeep 
and reproduction. 

I had an opportunity to have a close look at the programme 
some months back. I was impressed by some of the developments 
that have taken place under the scheme; but I must confess I had 
my fair share of doubts. The doubts were not so much about the 
manner in which the programme was implemented as about the 
nature of the programme itself and how far it was designed to meet 
some of the problems in rural areas in livestock management or in 
upgradation of the real standards of living of the poor. 

The problems of our livestock in villages, particularly the milch 
animals, are too well known to be repeated here at length. In short, 
we have too many cattle, producing too little. The phasing out of 
the low-yielding cattle consistent with the various local beliefs and 
the need to have a truly indigenous stock fully adaptable to all our 
conditions is truly a formidable problem. This is brought home to 
us in all its pathetic intensity in a year like this of severe drought. 
The farmer is at his wits’ end in large parts of the country, not 
knowing what to do about finding adequate fodder and water for 
the cattle and balancing the requirements of feed between the 
productive and useless cattle. 

The other major problem in rural areas contributing to our 
widespread poverty is the prevalence of very low nutritional 
standards. As the population grows in the countryside and there is 
no commensurate increase in productivity of protein rich crops or 
availability of nutritive products like milk, fish etc. the real 
standard of living gets further depressed. The competing claims of 
grazing lands and areas required for growing foodgrains and other 
crops affect the availability of natural feed for the cattle. This 
throws the farmers on to more and more artificially enriched feeds. 


24 


CHARAN SINGH: SELECTED SPEECHES 


I wonder if the long range consequences of such practices on the 
costs of milk and other factors have been fully looked into. 

I would agree with the experts that these are long range problems 
and in the short run we have to device programmes which will give 
an impetus to increase the production of cattle and arrange for 
marketing of milk and thus increase the income of the milk 
producers. There is no doubt that the arrangements made so far, 
including the chain of milk collecting centres, chilling plants, 
dairies extending veterinary services and improved transport and 
storing facilities have produced beneficial effects. These are 
impressive achievements. But were all the objectives equally well 
achieved? For instance, was the programme for provision of 
technical inputs and development of improved milch animal fully 
successful? Did milk production go up in such a measure that the 
consumption of milk in rural areas, particularly the poor people 
also went up? 

We shall have to find answers for these questions as we go along 
to the second phase of Operation Flood. Some more attention will 
have to be paid to the upgradation of stock and segregation of 
animals that are unable to contribute effectively to production. 
Research to evolve animals which produce more milk with less feed 
should be intensified. In any case, I would attach immediate 
importance to the need to ensure that the per capita consumption 
of milk in rural areas goes up. I hear a great deal about 
procurement of indigenously produced milk having gone up. I also 
hear that the landless and small size producers of milk are 
contributing over 70 per cent of their production to the marketed 
surplus. Putting two and two together, I can only worry about the 
effects these trends may have on nutritional standards of children 
in the poorer families in villages. By the same reckoning, I wonder 
about the upgradation of nutritional standards of the children of 
the urban poor. Is the per capita consumption of milk of such 
families going up? Are the mother dairies truly motherly, looking 
after all children alike? I understand some surveys are being made 
about these points and we should benefit by the findings. 

I would urge to look into these aspects more carefully while 
drawing up such programmes for commercialisation of the process 


CHARAN SINGH: SELECTED SPEECHES 


25 


of milk production and marketing. The emphasis should, however, 
be more on production than on marketing. 

The pattern of working of the Kaira Co-operative Union in 
Anand has very many good features in this respect and will have to 
be studied carefully in drawing up such programmes. After all, 
these are costly programmes in the Indian situation. This is so, even 
allowing for the munificence of the foreign agencies like the 
European Economic Community, World Bank, FAO etc. which 
we gratefully acknowledge. We have to ensure that costs are kept 
down; and if there is subsidisation, it should be only in favour of 
the economically weak both in urban and rural areas. I shall leave 
these thoughts with you today while wishing all those who are 
associated with these programmes that their endeavours should 
continue to be rewarding. 


Commitment to the NAM 


A fter assuming office as Prime Minister, I was hoping to 
participate in the Sixth Non-Aligned Summit due to be held next 
week in Havana. I was also looking forward to making your 
personal acquaintance and visiting your great country. We were 
touched that you sent a Special Envoy to extend your personal 
invitation to me. In these circumstances, it was a considerable 
disappointment for me to have had to decide not to attend the 
Summit. My many pre-occupations here at the present moment, 
prevent me from going to Havana. 

I am, however, extremely conscious of the momentous and 
historic nature of the Non-Aligned Summit over which you will be 
presiding with such distinction. The Non-Aligned Movement has 
gone far and achieved much since it was founded. Both Cuba and 
India are Founder Members of the Movement. We have co¬ 
operated to strengthen it. The principles and objectives of the 
Movement are now found attractive by an ever increasing number 
of nations and peoples. This very expansion and growth of the 
Movement has brought all of us great satisfaction, though it has 
also caused certain problems too. I have no doubt that, committed, 
as we are to the principles and objectives of Non-Alignment, which 
bind us together, we shall be able with your advice and guidance, 
and that of many collaborators within the Non-Aligned world, to 


Letter to the Cuban President Fidel Castro on the occasion of the Sixth Non-Aligned 
Movement Summit, New Delhi, 3 September 1979 



CHARAN SINGH: SELECTED SPEECHES 


27 


find ways to resolve these problems. The unity of the Movement 
must be maintained. The objectives of greater and more rapid 
economic development of the Non-Aligned nations through co¬ 
operation amongst themselves, as also by their co-operation as a 
group, with developed and industrialised societies must be taken 
forward. I know how deeply committed you and your country are 
to the concept that this should be achieved consistent with self- 
respect for all of us. 

Let us hope that under your stewardship over the next three 
years, the Movement will get strengthened. Your own wisdom, 
dynamism, patience and leadership, I have no doubt, will help the 
Movement emerge stronger and more united in the pursuit of its 
objectives. 

Our Foreign Minister, Shri S.N. Mishra, who in my absence is 
leading the Indian delegation, will co-operate fully with Your 
Excellency and your delegation, as indeed with all the other 
delegations, at the Summit, and I trust this co-operation will lead 
towards the achievement of our common goals. 

Excellency, I wish you and through you the Non-Aligned 
Summit meeting in Havana, all success in your deliberations. May 
your labours enhance peace and stability for which all mankind 
yearns so much. 


Weather behaviour and Crop Planning 


I feel honoured to have been invited to this concluding plenary 
session of the International symposium on Agricultural Research 
systems. This has been organised by the Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research to coincide with its Golden Jubilee 
celebrations, which has attracted scientists from several parts of 
the world: Their presence here has also lent meaning and content to 
the Global Convention for Agricultural Research systems which is 
also being held here. 

I feel honoured because I am, in essence, thought and taste, a 
farmer and the agricultural scientists devote a life-time of research 
in the cause of farmers. I can claim to have given some thought to 
the problems of Indian agriculture. Last year when I tried to set 
them down in a book, I said 

...if we seek economic development of the country that is, want 
men to be released from agriculture for diversion to industry, 
commerce, transport and other non-agricultural occupations 
and in as much as they will be released only to the extent 
agricultural production goes up, with fewer and still fewer men 
on the soil, capital in land will have to be invested in a far greater 
measure and technological improvement in agriculture effected 
at a far greater rate than we imagine, and have planned for. In 
other words, it can be stated as a rule of thumb that the degree of 


Valedictory address at ICAR Symposium, New Dellhi, 6 September 1979 



CHARAN SINGH: SELECTED SPEECHES 


29 


economic development of India turns on the extent of 
improvement in agricultural practices we are able to effect and 
the amount of capital we are able to invest in land. 

Next to, or alongwith the need to invest more and more capital in 
irrigation and fertilisers, comes the need for research. The most 
decisive incentive to the farmer can come only for research— 
increased production as a result of new and newer technology in 
seeds, irrigation or water management, application of fertilizers 
etc. 

I have quoted this at length to underline the vital importance of 
stepping up productivity by intensive cultivation in India. As the 
Father of the Nation, Mahatma Gandhi observed, real India lives 
in villages. And agriculture is the most important occupation in 
our villages and therefore, there is need for much greater attention 
to Indian agriculture and to raising productivity. Indeed, the role 
of agricultural research as an aid to productivity is extremely 
significant. 

The symposium must have discussed at some length about 
agricultural research systems. I am sure that you must have borne 
in mind the problems of countries like ours and the difficulties that 
the scientists and extension workers face in reaching out to the 
mass of peasantry with their well-tested ideas, practices and 
projects. The widespread illiteracy, deep-seated traditions 
bordering on the superstitions, all-round poverty, breeding 
attitudes of apathy and lethargy—these are formidable adversaries 
of those who would reach the fruits of research and new 
technologies to the millions of small peasants in our country. But 
efforts in the near past have shown that the Indian peasant can 
adapt to new technologies. But the role of nature continues to be 
paramount. 

You all know that India is passing through a period of wide¬ 
spread drought causing great hardship to people and to farm 
animals besides damage to crops. The abnormal behaviour of the 
monsoon underlines the urgency of efforts in the area of stabilising 
food production. It will of course not be possible to get the same 
production every year, but we can try to minimise fluctuation to 


30 


CHARAN SINGH: SELECTED SPEECHES 


the extent possible. I am glad that during this year, a beginning has 
been made by several of our State Governments in the area of 
contingency planning. Planning for variations in weather 
behaviour should become an integral part of crop planning. It will 
not be adequate if we merely have theoretical plans. Just as grain 
reserve is essential for achieving food security, seed reserve is 
necessary for ensuring crop security. The seed reserve should relate 
to crops and varieties that could be sown in drought and flood- 
prone areas in case the normal crop and the usual variety is either 
killed or cannot be sown due to absence of rains. I would appeal to 
the members of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research as 
well as International Federation of Agricultural Research Systems 
for Development to assist in the task of speedy identification of 
varieties and crops which can help Government to develop and 
implement contingency plans. 

I am glad that the Indian Council of Agricultural Research has 
chosen to commemorate its Golden Jubilee through three 
important activities. The first about which the Director General 
spoke this afternoon, relates to the transfer of technology from the 
laboratory to the field. If this activity is carried out with dedication 
and enthusiasm, many small and marginal farmers will be able to 
get more income from their farms or fish ponds. I would request 
the ICAR to take particular interest in the transfer of appropriate 
technology to landless labour families. Animal husbandry 
involving the raising of cow, buffalo, goat, sheep, pigs and poultry 
could help to supplement the income of landless labour families 
provided you are able to develop methods of assisting them in the 
areas of nutrition, health care, processing and marketing. All 
beneficiary-oriented programmes for small and marginal farmers 
and agricultural labour will have to be supported by appropriate 
beneficiary-oriented services. 

The peasant anywhere in the world is an incorrigible 
individualist. Working with nature and mostly in solitude, he does 
not find the necessity of having to give orders to or take orders 
from anybody. Yet, these qualities do not hamper his receptivity to 
ideas if they are conveyed to him in a manner consistent with his 
independence of outlook. There must be an attitude of shared 


CHARAN SINGH: SELECTED SPEECHES 


31 


wisdom while conveying the technologies to the peasantry; you 
cannot simply be ‘holier than thou’ with a person whose 
experiences and responses are drawn from close communion with 
nature itself. For these reasons, it is essential to have a very simple 
mechanism of extension and the research worker will also benefit 
by having as direct a contact with the farmers as possible. I, there¬ 
fore, hope that all Agricultural Universities and Central Institutes 
and Co-ordinated Projects will do their best to have such contacts 
and also identify the precise constraints operating at the level of 
poor farmers and landless labour and help to remedy them. 

Your second programme of launching a movement for the 
conservation of natural resources, particularly useful plants and 
animals, is an exceedingly important one. I am happy to learn that 
a detailed blueprint for the establishment of a “Gene Sanctuary” in 
the Garo hills of Meghalaya for preserving citrus material has been 
developed by ICAR scientists. This will help to protect the 
environment which has enabled considerable variability to occur in 
oranges along the north-eastern Himalayan region. I hope you will 
take up similar activity in other parts of the Himalayas. I would 
like to emphasize the need for conservation of soil which is after all 
our most important natural resource. I am sure, soil science 
research will continue to be important and measures to check soil 
run-off, erosion etc. will continue to be guided by the researchers. 

Finally, I am happy that you have chosen as part of your Golden 
Jubilee activities, the medium of an International Symposium on 
Agricultural Research and Education System for Development. 
Fortunately, in our country there are now close linkages between 
research and educational institutions and development departments 
in the field of agriculture, animal husbandry, fisheries and forestry. 
These, however, need to be strengthened further, so that the 
benefits from the work of our dedicated scientists can flow to 
farmers and fishermen with the minimum of delay. I would like to 
urge our Agricultural Universities to take the initiative in forging 
stronger linkages with the concerned State Department’s as well as 
farmers’ organisations and also other voluntary and non-official 
organisations because ultimately the aim of Government should 
only be to help people to help themselves. 


32 


CHARAN SINGH: SELECTED SPEECHES 


The ICAR can look back with satisfaction on the work done 
during the last 50 years. The next 50 years will be more crucial in 
determining the future of our country. Without adequate scientific 
inputs, our desire to accelerate the pace of agricultural progress 
will not be fulfilled. The ICAR has, therefore, to play in the future 
even more important role in the national development than it has 
done in the past. I wish you all success in this challenging task and 
assure you of Government’s full support in it. 

To the scientists who have come from outside, may I say how 
much we value your assistance, advice and co-operation. I was 
happy to have had the opportunity of inaugurating the new 
laboratories of the International Crop Research Institute for the 
Semi-Arid Tropics recently at Hyderabad. Such institutions 
promote greater international co-operation among agricultural 
scientists and hence we welcome them. I also give my best wishes to 
the International Federation of Agricultural Research Systems for 
Development in its work of promoting greater collaboration 
among the agricultural research organisations of developing 
countries. 


Health for All 


O n behalf of the Government and the people of India, it is my 
privilege to welcome you to my country. You have taken the 
trouble to travel to New Delhi from distant places in order to 
participate in this Conference. It is a measure of the importance, all 
of us attach to the health needs of the people. We, the people 
inhabiting the various lands, are all limbs of one corporate body. If 
one limb of this body is weak, it is bound to affect the other parts. It 
is gratifying to note that there is greater awareness of this fact today 
than at any other time in recent history. It is necessary that this 
awareness should grow and spread further. 

As I stand before you, I am reminded of a statement of Mahatma 
Gandhi, the greatest man of our times, who restored to us, the 
gospel of truth and non-violence in man’s struggle for 
emancipation. Two weeks from now, on October 2, we will-be 
celebrating the Mahatma’s 110th birthday. With your permission, 
I recall the statement I have referred to: 

“I will give you a Talisman. Whenever you are in doubt or when 
the self becomes too much with you, apply the following test. 
Recall the face of the poorest and the weakest man whom you 
may have seen, and ask yourself if the step you contemplate, is 
going to be of any use to him. Will he gain anything by it? Will it 


Inaugural address on the occasion of South-East Asia Regional Conference of WHO, 
New Delhi, 18 September 1979 



34 


CHARAN SINGH: SELECTED SPEECHES 


restore him a control over his own life and destiny? In other 
words, will it lead to Swaraj (freedom) for the hungry and 
spiritually starving millions? Then you will find your doubts and 
your self melting away.” 

I believe, this statement is appropriate to the Conference, we are 
holding today. Where does the poorest and the weakest man we 
saw last, live or exist? We have seen him in all the countries 
represented here. We see him every day. He lives in a village lane, in 
a dilapidated hut and in shattered health, unaware of what is 
happening around him. He has been enduring the pain of his 
existence for too long. He is conscious of this pain. He raises a 
subdued cry. People look at him and pass by. Some halt and pause 
and think. 'Is this what freedom means? What is the crime that this 
man has committed that he should have been reduced to such a 
situation? Is there no remedy for it?’ 

I request you to keep this man in mind as you discuss the various 
items on your agenda. He epitomizes the mass of the people living 
in South-East Asia and other parts of the world whom we have to 
help urgently. 

What are the reasons for the pathetic condition of this man? To 
my mind he is the victim of a conspiracy of circumstances, national 
as well as international. At the national level, poverty with all its 
accompanying ills, including bad health, has been his inheritance. 
Unfortunately, poverty is measured more in terms of price indices, 
per capita incomes, G.N.P., purchasing power and all that, than in 
terms of the principal ingredients of health—physical, mental and 
spiritual. We are more concerned about the national gains from the 
green and the industrial revolutions than about the health of the 
man who brings them about. The vast distance that separates the 
adequately developed areas from the villages, the slums in 
cosmopolitan towns and all other areas of neglect, wherever these 
may be, relegates this man to a situation in which the development 
of his personality is well nigh impossible. 

At the international level, the mosaic is hardly different. 
Whatever you and I may claim to have done during the last 30 years 
and more, the harsh fact that continues to stare us in the face is that 



CHARAN SINGH: SELECTED SPEECHES 


35 


the world is divided into the haves and the have-nots. There are 
vast islands of affluence and endless deserts of poverty. Some do 
not know what to do with their money; others do not know how 
and where to earn it. More resources go into a single nuclear device 
than may be needed to establish a hundred-thousand health care 
centres in the rural areas. The armament race continues unabated. 
I do not know whether those involved in it are aware of the fact that 
four-fifths of the world’s population have no access to any 
organised form of health care and that half a million women in 
Asia and Africa die every year while delivering babies. 

If we keep the poorest and the weakest man in mind in the course 
of our deliberations at this Conference and take even a few 
practical decisions to lift him from the morass in which he has been 
sinking, we will really be taking a historic step forward. 

I take this occasion to pay tribute to the World Health 
Organisation for the magnificent work that it has been doing to 
promote health as a vital investment in man’s development. It is 
largely due to the efforts of the WHO. that small pox has been 
eradicated from the globe. The success we have been achieving, 
even though gradually, in combating other diseases, has brought 
into sharp relief the very great importance of regional and 
international co-operation in health care programmes. Again, it is 
due to the sustained efforts of the WHO. that national planners 
and administrators have begun to recognise health as an input in 
the overall process of development. If the New International 
Economic Order is accepted as fc a state of international just redress 
of the present imbalances between developing and the affluent 
countries’, it is imperative that, apart from other things, there 
should be greater collaboration and give-and-take amongst all the 
countries to liberate the man in the dilapidated hut from the 
tyranny of his present situation. He has to be made conscious of his 
basic health needs. He has to be encouraged to participate in 
programmes designed to meet these needs. And those responsible 
for administering nations have to give greater and urgent 
recognition to the fact that economic development without 
simultaneous health development is an infructuous activity. 

In some countries infant mortality is as high as 122 per one 


36 


CHARAN SINGH: SELECTED SPEECHES 


thousand live-births. In some others, it is 15. The maternal 
mortality rate per 10,000 live-births ranges between 0.5 and 177. 
Can there be a more devastating commentary on the imbalances 
that prevail in our universe in the field of health? The New 
International Economic Order must take cognizance of these 
imbalances. This cognizance should find reflection in the regional 
and global strategies for health care and these strategies must be 
implemented with greater speed and vigour through the joint 
efforts of the developed and the developing countries. 

In this context, I welcome the Alma Ata Declaration of 1978 
‘Health for all by the year 2000 A.D.’—this is a very laudable goal. 
If this Declaration is given the same importance as has been given 
to the philosophy of the nuclear deterrence in recent years and if it 
is implemented sincerely and urgently, generations to come will 
look back at it as the Health Magna Carta. We are a signatory to 
the Declaration and on our own, we have taken several very 
important steps to organise health care services and bring them to 
the doorstep of every village in our country. 

I trust that some of you may have heard of our Rural Health 
Scheme. We launched this Scheme in 1977, and its objectives 
harmonise with the aspirations of the Alma Ata Declaration. The 
basic ingredient of our Rural Health Scheme is to place people’s 
health in people’s hands. More than 100,000 community health 
volunteers and 200,000 traditional birth attendants have been 
trained in villages under this Scheme. This band of over 300,000 
workers are not Government servants. They live in the villages in 
which they function. We are also simultaneously trying to integrate 
all health and family welfare services in order that those health 
officials who until the other day were responsible for administering 
just one programme, e.g., malaria, should be able to give attention 
to all the basic health care needs of the community. Consequently, 
a new force of multipurpose health workers has now come into 
being. Nearly 100,000 such workers have already been trained. 
Currently, we are engaged in perhaps the largest ever training 
programme of health workers organised anywhere in the world. 

The larger significance of our Rural Health Programme is that it 
seeks to reduce the enormous imbalances that mark the health 


CHARAN SINGH: SELECTED SPEECHES 


37 


scene in our country. Our Health Policy seeks to give importance 
to the indigenous systems of medicine which have their roots in 
villages but which had languished in the past because of the 
absence of adequate support from the Government. We are also 
planning to modify the system of medical education in order to 
make it more responsive to our needs. 

In the expansion of our resources in manpower development 
and training, in enlarging our drug industry and strengthening our 
drug delivery system, in research and, in general, in the 
implementation of the Alma Ata Declaration, we wish to establish 
greater collaboration with all the countries within and outside our 
Region. We have always appreciated the help that we have been 
receiving from the WHO. From our side, we are most keen to 
render whatever assistance, we are capable of, to all the countries 
within and outside our Region. Our efforts should be to help each 
other and thus strengthen the WHO which must continue to play 
its pivotal role in the harmonious, healthy development of man. 
There are areas in which greater technical collaboration is called 
for. I am sure that as a result of this Conference, the role of mutual 
collaboration will increase, to the benefit of the common man. This 
collaboration should not however, lead to the strengthening of the 
existing multinational monopolies in the drugs and pharmaceuticals 
industry. It is necessary that the countries of our Region should be 
enabled to exploit their resources and establish their own drug 
industries. On our part, we shall be most willing to help in this 
venture. 


Curbs On Economic Offenders 


I should like at the outset to welcome the Chief Ministers who 
have responded so readily to our invitation at relatively short 
notice to discuss at this Conference, matters of vital and immediate 
importance to the country as a whole. The economic situation 
through which the country is now passing is one which 
understandably causes all of us some anxiety. For some months 
now, there has been a substantial rise in prices, and while there is an 
abundance of food reserves, there have been reports of shortage of 
other commodities. This is a situation which calls for concerted 
efforts by all concerned irrespective of the party or the region to 
which one belongs. Both the Central and the State Governments 
are vitally concerned in taking measures for remedial action. The 
State Governments in particular have a crucial role to play in 
ensuring that the people, particularly the vulnerable sections of 
society, have access to adequate supplies of essential commodities 
at reasonable prices. It was in this context that 1 thought, we should 
get together early to have a quick and constructive discussion on 
what needs to be done to help the people of this country to tide over 
the present difficulties. 

On this occasion, I do not propose to dwell on the circumstances 
that have led to the present situation. I had dealt with this aspect at 


Speech while inaugurating the Chief Ministers’ Conference, New Delhi, 27 September 1979 



CHARAN SINGH: SELECTED SPEECHES 


39 


length in a recent press statement. Suffice it to say that successive 
budget deficits in the last three years resulting in rise in the money 
supply, delays in making adjustment in administered prices, 
deceleration in the production of vital commodities such as coal 
and steel, failures in transportation, port and power infrastructure 
and a deplorable worsening of attitude of industrial labour have all 
contributed to bring us to the pass in which we find ourselves 
today. Objective analysis brings out very clearly that the causes of 
the present phenomenon are not of recent origin, but are to be 
found in deficiencies that had occurred over the past several years. 
In recent weeks, the adverse features in the economy have been 
aggravated by failures of the monsoon over large parts of the 
country. This has fuelled inflationary tendencies as a result of 
expectations of lower Kharif output and higher prices. 

However, we are today concerned not with probing into the past, 
but in dealing with the present and providing good for the future. 
While there is no room for complacency, there is equally no 
warrant for pessimism. The Nation is in a much better position 
today to tackle economic difficulties than it was ever before. We 
have massive stocks of foodgrains with which we can effectively 
overcome the ill-effects of any shortfall in Kharif production. 
However, the bad monsoon is bound to lead to scarcity of drinking 
water and fodder. The State Governments would have to take 
effective action to mitigate this hardship. It is essential that ‘Food 
for Work’ programmes should be stepped up and employment 
opportunities generated in rural areas to ensure that people do not 
leave villages for want of work. The works taken up for this 
purpose should be such as would lead to the creation of permanent 
assets in those areas. 

Apart from foodgrains stocks, we have substantial foreign 
exchange reserves which are being utilised to import large 
quantities of essential commodities such as edible oils to 
supplement domestic production. With these advantages and the 
requisite political will, there should be no difficulty by the Central 
and State Governments taking effective action to curb any 
unjustified price rise and ensure adequate availability of essential 
goods for the common people. 


40 


CHARAN SINGH: SELECTED SPEECHES 


In fact, several measures have already been taken on hand 
towards this end. Wheat procurement has touched an all time 
record of 8 million tons and a massive movement of foodgrains 
from the producing centres to shortage and consumption points, is 
being implemented. Import of edible oils has continued on a 
substantial scale and maximum stock limits have been set to 
prevent hoarding. Maximum ex-mill and retail prices have been 
fixed for sugar and monthly releases stepped up to an all time high 
of 6 lakh tons. Steps have also been taken to ensure greater 
availability of cheaper varieties of cloth and to roll back prices of 
cotton yarn. On the monetary side, severe credit controls have been 
imposed and bank lending rates raised to limit trading inventories 
and to curb speculation. The drive against tax evaders has been 
intensified and the States have been advised to enforce the 
provisions of the Essential Commodities Act vigorously. At the 
same time, action is being taken in the various Central Ministries to 
implement measures designed to improve performance in the vital 
sectors of railway transportation, steel, coal and power, but in the 
very nature of things, the effects of these steps will be felt only over 
a period of time. 

There are indications that the measures taken by the Central and 
the State Governments have already started yielding results. While 
inflation has not been halted, the rate of inflation is showing signs 
of coming down. Nevertheless, I think we must all concede that 
much more needs to be done, if the present trends are to be arrested 
and a healthy outlook restored to the economy. Indeed, it is a 
matter of distress that inspite of an abundance of stocks of 
commodities such as foodgrains, sugar and edible oils, prices 
should have risen. This phenomenon is clearly a result of two 
factors, namely, the inadequacy of the present legitimate channels 
of distribution and secondly, the ability of anti-social elements to 
indulge in unscrupulous activities. It is the bounden duty of the 
Central and State Government’s to tackle these problems speedily. 
I am happy that the State Governments have all accepted the need 
for the maintenance of a public distribution system with a view to 
checking tendencies that create artificial imbalances between 
supply and demand. It would seem, however, that the existing 
arrangements need to be further strengthened and expanded to 


CHARAN SINGH: SELECTED SPEECHES 


41 


cover new items such as edible oils. I was very happy to know that 
the recent conference of Chief Secretaries and Inspectors General 
of Police has dealt with these matters in some detail. The 
suggestions made and the conclusions reached would have to be 
meticulously followed up and the administration geared up to 
ensure an effective and efficient distribution system so that 
essential commodities are supplied at reasonable prices and in 
adequate measure, particularly to the poorer sections of our 
society. 

At the same time, action would have to be taken to put an end to 
hoarding, black-marketing and profiteering. There can be no 
condonation of those who indulge in these anti-social activities. 
These undesirable elements, who take advantage of the situation to 
cause sufferings to the people for their private gain, will have to be 
dealt with sternly and with no compunction. We have already 
advised the State Governments to enforce the Essential 
Commodities Act and the various control orders issued 
thereunder. To the extent that these punitive provisions are 
insufficient to deal effectively with those who resort to various 
subterfuges and devices to achieve only their own private 
advantage to the detriment of the people, other and more drastic 
measures may have to be thought of. I am sure you all agree that so 
long as we can eschew the taint of personal or political 
consideration, while taking action against such economic 
offenders, there would be ample justification at a time such as this 
to employ drastic measures to bring such persons to book. 

I shall look forward to hearing from you, suggestions regarding 
the legislative and administrative actions that may be required in 
this sphere. 

We have also proposed to discuss today, the law and order 
situation in the context of the forthcoming Lok Sabha elections. 
We have had an excellent tradition of holding free and fair 
elections and I am sure that this will be maintained during the 
coming elections also. We have a collective responsibility in this 
area as much as in the economic management of our country and it 
should be our endeavour to work on the basis of a common 
consensus in all such matters. 


42 


CHARAN SINGH: SELECTED SPEECHES 


I look forward to a business-like and fruitful discussion today 
with you on these subjects. 


Children are Nation’s Treasure 


(Children’s day in this International Year of the Child should 
serve as a reminder to us of the neglect of the child. Large numbers 
of children in metropolitan towns are born on pavements. Larger 
numbers in villages are forced to work for a living, when they 
should be playing, singing, dancing and reading. 

Unless we as a government and as a people feel for the poor, 
observance of Children’s Day may become a ritual, an exercise in 
escapism and self-deception. There are more than 250 million 
children in our country below 14 years of age. Eighty per cent of 
them live in the villages. Infant mortality continues to be high. 

Our constitutional commitment to children and our National 

% 

Policy for Children have to be reflected in action here and now. 
The Revised Minimum Needs Programme should be sincerely 
implemented so that the people’s basic needs like health care, 
education and communication are quickly met. 

There can be no gradualism in these matters. Governments at the 
Centre and in the States, social organisations and individuals 
should work together for the quick ending of poverty, social and 
economic deprivation and unemployment. Schemes for immunisa¬ 
tion against diseases, child care and welfare centres should be 
executed fast and sincerely. 


Message on the children’s Day, New Delhi, 14 November 1979 



44 


CHARAN SINGH: SELECTED SPEECHES 


Government’s policy on education envisages special incentives 
like mid-day meals, free uniforms and free text books to poor 
children. Child labour can be abolished only when legislation is 
accompanied by such incentives and also by schemes for full 
employment of adults. 

All those engaged in child welfare work should bring to these 
tasks, a touch of compassion. Only those who feel and care for 
child can serve the child. Otherwise our schemes will end in 
wasteful spending on frills. 

I appeal to all, particularly the affluent, to contribute generously 
to the National Children’s Fund. 

Only if our children are happy and gay, healthy and educated, 
well-fed and well-clothed, can we prosper as a nation. To this end, 
we should dedicate ourselves every day and every year particularly 
on this day and in this year. 


Atomic Energy for Development 


W E are at the cross-roads in the history of the development of 
atomic energy and, therefore, the deliberations of the present 
session are of special importance. We are all agreed that mankind 
today is confronted with an unprecedented threat of self-extinction 
arising from the massive and competitive accumulation of the most 
destructive weapons ever produced, particularly the nuclear 
weapons. The existing arsenals of nuclear weapons, which 
according to an authoritative estimate made ten years ago, 
represent about 15 tons of TNT per person on the globe, are more 
than sufficient to destroy all life on earth many times over. And yet 
the nuclear arms race continues unabated. At the same time, 
certain events such as the one commonly referred to as the Three 
Mile Island Accident which took place in the US early this year, 
have aroused public feelings, not only in the United States but also 
in other countries, against any form of nuclear energy. On the other 
hand, the energy crisis facing most of the world today and the fact 
that, at least for several decades to come, nuclear power will 
continue, and possibly even in an increasing proportion, to 
constitute a major component in the energy sources of many 
countries, will force countries, which today have no nuclear 
programmes, to turn to this source of energy. In this process, the 
International Atomic Energy Agency, which was established with 


Address at the 23rd Session of the General Conference of The International Atomic 
Energy Agency, New Delhi, 4 December 1979 



46 


CHARAN SINGH: SELECTED SPEECHES 


the objective, as clearly stated in its Statute, of accelerating and 
enlarging the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and 
prosperity throughout the world, has an important role to 
perform. It is our fervent hope that in discharging this important 
role, the Agency will function in strict conformity with the letter 
and spirit of its Statute. We should always remember that the 
Agency was established primarily to help in strengthening 
international co-operation for the promotion of the transfer and 
utilisation of nuclear energy for economic and social development, 
especially in the developing countries. While it is true that the 
Agency also has regulatory functions, it cannot be contested that 
such regulatory functions can only be ancillary to the main 
promotional role of the Agency. I mention this because we are 
concerned to note that in recent years increasing stress is being 
placed on the regulatory rather than the promotional aspects of the 
Agency’s functioning. Safeguards have become more important 
than technical assistance. Furthermore, what technical assistance 
continues to be provided by the Agency is being subjected to 
restrictive and preferential pre-conditions. This trend should be 
reversed in order to avoid the erosion of the credibility of this great 
Organisation which has in the past made very significant 
contributions to the development of the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy for the benefit of mankind. 

During the past decade, much has been said and written on the 
question of the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, India has 
always believed in the concept of genuine and comprehensive non¬ 
proliferation and we have consistently held that non-proliferation 
measures, in order to be truly effective, must be applied uniformly 
and universally to all nuclear activities in all States. It is not merely 
of historical interest to recall that the concept of‘non-proliferation 
of nuclear weapons’ was for the first time introduced in India in 
1964 when, by inscribing a new item under that agenda, we asked 
the United Nations to make a departure from earlier discussions 
which were based on the necessity to avoid the further spread or 
dissemination of nuclear weapons. This initiative was in line with 
the proposal made by India exactly a decade earlier in 1954 for a 
complete cessation of all nuclear weapon tests. Our approach then, 
as now, was based on the correct premise borne out of bitter 



CHARAN SINGH: SELECTED SPEECHES 


47 


historical experience that both horizontal and vertical proliferation, 
being integral parts of the same problem, had to be dealt with as a 
whole, always together and simultaneously, if the problem of 
proliferation of nuclear weapons was to be really solved. In 1965, 
the United Nations urged the early conclusion of a Non¬ 
proliferation treaty which “should embody an acceptable balance 
of mutual responsibilities and obligations of the nuclear and non¬ 
nuclear powers”. The key word here was ‘embody’. And yet the 
treaty, when it finally emerged, was almost totally silent on the 
problem of vertical proliferation of nuclear weapons. The goal of 
nuclear non-proliferation, as the Final Document of the United 
Nations Special Session devoted to disarmament held last year 
clearly states, “is on the one hand to prevent the emergence of any 
additional nuclear-weapon States besides the existing five nuclear- 
weapon States and on the other progressively reduce and eventually 
eliminate nuclear weapons altogether”. The Final Document went 
on to say that “this involves obligations and responsibilities on the 
part of both nuclear-weapon States and non-nuclear-weapon 
States, the former undertaking to stop the nuclear arms race and to 
achieve nuclear disarmament...and all States undertaking to 
prevent the spread of nuclear weapons”. And yet, in practice, we 
find that while various measures have been initiated to check the 
possible spread of nuclear weapons, we are yet to witness a single 
significant step to even slow down, let alone stop or reverse, the far 
more dangerous and absolutely irrational nuclear arms race that is 
actually going on. I am convinced that we cannot expect any 
progress in one without corresponding progress in the other. What 
is even more distressing is the fact that many of those, who preach 
the virtue of horizontal non-proliferation, claim in the same 
breath, their right, based on the theory of nuclear deterrance, not 
only to possess but even to use nuclear weapons to safeguard 
national security. 

Non-proliferation is a much abused word. In the name of non¬ 
proliferation, efforts continue to be made to put obstacles in the 
way of developing countries who are trying, very often at 
considerable sacrifice, to develop indigenous facilities for the 
peaceful utilisation of atomic energy. In the name of non¬ 
proliferation, smaller nations are forced to accept restraints and 


48 


CHARAN SINGH: SELECTED SPEECHES 


restrictions none of which the nuclear weapon powers are prepared 
to accept for themselves. In the name of non-proliferation, there 
are even moves towards institutional measures aimed at limiting 
certain nuclear fuel cycle activities to a so-called safe and secure 
locations, thereby introducing a regime where the vast majority of 
countries will be placed at a permanent economic and 
technological disadvantage. This is inspite of the clear injunction 
laid down in the unanimously adopted Final Document of the 
United Nations Special Session on Disarmament that “Non¬ 
proliferation measures should not jeopardise the full exercise of the 
inalienable rights of all States to apply and develop their 
programmes for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy for economic 
and social development in conformity with their priorities, 
interests and needs”. The document went on to say that “all States 
should also have access to, and be free to acquire technology, 
equipment and materials for peaceful uses of nuclear energy, 
taking into account the particular needs of the developing 
countries”. These are important considerations which should 
constantly be kept in mind by the members of the International 
Atomic Energy Agency which has the primary role in the 
promotion of the peaceful utilisation of atomic energy. 

I understand that in recent years, one of the major functions of 
the Agency has been the strengthening of international safeguards 
covering national nuclear installations. All are agreed that 
safeguards should be non-discriminatory. At the same time, the 
view is held, with which we cannot agree, that safeguards are 
relevant only in the case of horizontal proliferation. If 
international verification which is what is sought to be ensured 
through safeguards, is a non-proliferation measure, it must apply 
equally to the horizontal and vertical aspects of proliferation of 
nuclear weapons. It is contended that the jurisdiction of the 
International Atomic Energy Agency covers only the peaceful 
applications of atomic energy and, as such, it cannot consider the 
question of imposing safeguards on non-civilian nuclear 
establishments. I would submit that the time has come for the 
Agency to carefully reflect on this aspect of the problem. This is 
particularly important when we know that the only reported cases 
of large-scale diversions of weapons grade nuclear material, which 



Being garlanded by the Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu, Sh. M. G. 
Ramachandran, New Delhi, 6 September 1979 










Attending Urs of Nizamuddin Aulia, New Delhi, 10 September 1979 


Inaugurating the WHO Regional Conference for South-East Asia, 
18 September 1979 








With the King of Nepal, New Delhi, 21 September 1979 












Addressing the Chief Ministers Conference, New Delhi, 27 September 1979 



Offering flowers at the Samadhi of Mahatma Gandhi 














Inaugurating Operation Flood-II (Mother Dairy) New Delhi, 2 October 1979 


Launching an English Weekly Real India and Hindi Weekly Aslee Bharat, 
New Delhi, 2 October 1979 








Paying Floral Tributes to Jaya Prakash Narayan, New Delhi, 9 October 1979 



Releasing a stamp to mark the General Conference of the International Atomic 
Energy Agency, New Delhi, 7 December 1979 


\ 




Presenting a gift to Mother Teresa, New Delhi, 7 November 1979 







With President N. Sanjiva Reddy, 9 January 1980 



At the If tar Reception, New Delhi 





CHARAN SINGH: SELECTED SPEECHES 


49 


is precisely what safeguards are meant to prevent, have taken place 
from the sanctuaries of the nuclear weapon States. 

The international community has already declared the use of 
nuclear weapons as a violation of the UN Charter and a crime 
against humanity. The Geneva Protocol of 1925, which prohibits 
the use in war of chemical and biological weapons, has proved 
invaluable in current efforts towards the elimination of both these 
categories of weapons of mass destruction. A similar treaty or 
convention prohibiting the use of nuclear weapons could prove a 
precursor to nuclear disarmament, besides being useful in itself. 

India has been in the field of nuclear energy for over three 
decades. At the end of the second world war, when most nations 
looked upon atomic energy as a force of destruction, India was 
already thinking in terms of harnessing atomic energy solely for 
economic development. The development and growth of nuclear 
science in India from the laboratory stage to the industrial stage, 
largely on its own, vindicates the hypothesis that developing 
countries need not follow the path traversed by advanced countries 
for the application of science to society but can, and must, jump 
certain stages of technological development through planned 
utilisation of advanced science and technology. Direct benefits of 
the Indian atomic energy programme are more profound and of 
immense significance. The knowledge and skills imparted to 
Indian industry has considerably enhanced their technological 
capability, quality consciousness and self-confidence. The 
contribution made by atomic energy has helped in the generation 
of a national scientific culture. At the same time, we have never 
deflected from our commitment to the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. 

As I have already stated, the International Atomic Energy 
Agency has an important role to play in the development of the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy. I hope that the deliberations of this 
and succeeding conferences of the International Atomic Energy 
Agency will succeed in formulating a long term plan that would 
enable the developing countries in particular, to utilise the benefits 
of atomic energy for their national development. The Agency 
should also seek to establish the means to implement such a plan. 


50 


CHARAN SINGH: SELECTED SPEECHES 


In this process, the Agency should look at the existing norms of 
international co-operation in this field. What we need is co¬ 
operation and not non-co-operation. In this area, as in many 
others, the task before us calls for wisdom and maturity coupled 
with a high degree of mutual trust and understanding. 


MESSAGES/TRIBUTES 




CHARAN SINGH: SELECTED SPEECHES 


53 


Greetings to Pakistan 


On the occasion of the Independence Day anniversary of 
Pakistan, it gives me great pleasure to extend on behalf of the 
people and Government of India and on my own behalf, sincere 
greetings and felicitations to Your Excellency and to the 
Government and people of Pakistan. 

Please also accept my best wishes for Your Excellency’s health 
and for the progress and prosperity of the people of Pakistan. 


Message of greetings to H.E. General Mohammed Zia-uI-Haq, President of the Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan on the occasion of Pakistan’s Independence Day, New Delhi, 
13 August 1979 



54 


CHARAN SINGH: SELECTED SPEECHES 


Succour in Distress 


I am deeply shocked at the enormous loss of precious lives and 
destruction of property caused by the sudden floods in Morvi town 
and Lilapur village of Rajkot district in Gujarat. I am sure, the 
entire nation will assist the Gujarat Government in providing 
succour and relief to the affected people. Please convey my 
heartfelt condolences to the members of these families who have 
lost their near and dear ones. While nature’s fury cannot altogether 
be prevented, we should ensure that the injuries caused by it are 
healed up quickly. 

I assure you that the Government of India will spare no pains to 
assist the Gujarat Government in this hour of trial. 


Condolence message on the loss of life and property in Gujarat Floods, New Delhi, 
13 August 1979 




CHARAN SINGH: SELECTED SPEECHES 


55 


Mountbatten—A Great Friend 


I am deeply grieved to learn of the death of Lord Mountbatten in 
tragic circumstances. His distinguished record of service for his 
motherland which took him to the highest ranks in the Royal Navy 
and the defence forces will find a place in the history of United 
Kingdom. Here in India, he will be remembered as a Viceroy and a 
Governor General who at the time of India’s Independence gave us 
abundantly of his wisdom and goodwill. It was in recognition of 
our affection for him, respect for his impartiality and regard for his 
concern for India’s freedom that the entire nation readily accepted 
Lord Mountbatten as the first Governor General of Independent 
India. His drive and vigour helped in the difficult period after our 
Independence. In his demise, India has lost a great friend. We are 
particularly sad that his projected visit to India at the end of this 
year cannot take place. 

I would request you to convey our sincere condolences to the 
members of his family. 


Condolence message to the British Prime Minister on the death of Lord Mountbatten, 
New Delhi, 27 August 1979 



56 


CHARAN SINGH: SELECTED SPEECHES 


JP—The Conscience of the Nation 


T he death of Lok Nayak Jaya Prakash Narayan has stilled the 
conscience of the nation. Since the death of Mahatma Gandhi, the 
mantle of moral and spiritual leadership of the nation had 
appropriately fallen on him. This onerous responsibility, he was 
discharging till almost the last moment of his life. His 
contributions to awaken the best in our people are too numerous to 
be recalled. Representing the spirit of youthful rebellion against 
foreign domination, J.P. in due course of time blossomed into a 
restless fighter for the poor, the depressed, the exploited. In the 
formative years of our Independence, J.P., while he scrupulously 
kept himself away from power, held aloft the torch of freedom and 
individual liberty. His total dedication to Gandhism came when he 
decided to leave active politics and devote his life to the Bhoodan 
Movement. But this did not deter him from coming back and 
assuming the leadership of the people at a time when the flames of 
democratic freedom were sought to be extinguished. His efforts set 
in motion a second liberation movement and India emerged once 
again in March 1977 as a torch-bearer of individual liberty and 
people’s democracy. Even as he was waging this historic struggle, 
he fought valiantly against an illness which in the case of less 
courageous people would have been fatal. His loss is irreparable. 
But the message he has left, will always serve as a beacon reminding 


Condolence message on the death of Lok Nayak Jaya Prakash Narayan, New Delhi, 
8 October 1979 



CHARAN SINGH: SELECTED SPEECHES 


57 


us of the higher purposes and dedications. May his soul rest in 
peace! The sun of integrity in public life has sunk but let us hope, no 
night will follow! 


58 


CHARAN SINGH: SELECTED SPEECHES 


Mother Teresa—A Great Philanthropist 


M y hearty congratulations to Mother Teresa for the 
singular honour conferred on her by the award of Nobel Peace 
Prize this year. Mother Teresa is an institution by herself. She has 
demonstrated the efficacy of the Gandhian approach of service to 
humanity. Her choice is well deserved and there cannot be any 
other person more deserving than Mother Teresa for this unique 
distinction. India is proud of the laurels she has brought to this 
country which she has adopted as hers. I am grateful for the honour 
done to India which stands fully committed towards establishing 
peace in the world. 


Message on the occasion of conferment of the Nobel Peace Prize on Mother Teresa, 
New Delhi, 17 October 1979 



CHARAN SINGH: SELECTED SPEECHES 


59 


Celebration of 1400th Hijri New Year 


The world is commemorating the 1400th year of Hijra 
beginning tomorrow. An important historical occasion, such as 
this, is not only sacred for our Muslim brothers but for all 
mankind. We plan to celebrate the 1400th year of the Hijra in a 
befitting manner and I would call upon all Indians to participate 
and support these celebrations. For India, the celebration of the 
1400th anniversary of Hijra, which has been declared the “Year of 
Jerusalem” is equally significant. We have witnessed in this century 
the displacement of thousands of people of Palestine and lately the 
usurpation of the holy city of Jerusalem. 

In this period of harsh political antagonisms fuelled by narrow 
interests, we earnestly feel the need to place emphasis on an 
underlying and continuous thread of morality in relations among 
nation States. India’s principled stand arises from this deep rooted 
belief. We protested against the actions of Israel from the time 
when areas were forcibly occupied and people driven from their 
ancestral hearths and homes. We have never wavered in 
demanding the vacation of Israeli occupation of the West Bank, 
Gaza and the Golan Heights. Further, the holy city of Jerusalem 
ought to become a symbol of peace and harmony and not a bone of 
contention. It is our wish that Jerusalem should be open to people 
of all religions who can freely worship in the shrines of the holy 


Message on the eve of the 1400th Hijri New Year, New Delhi, 20 November 1979 



60 


CHARAN SINGH: SELECTED SPEECHES 


city. In this “Year of Jerusalem”, the world community owes it to 
the disinherited residents and citizens of that city to work for the 
implementation of the resolutions of the U.N. Security Council 
and the U.N. General Assembly which have continuously 
reaffirmed the right of our Arab brothers to return to their 
homeland. 


CHARAN SINGH: SELECTED SPEECHES 


61 


The Hockey Wizard 


I n the passing away of Major Dhyan Chand, we have lost one of 
the leading luminaries of the sports world. The genius, the artistry 
and the dignity that Major Dhyan Chand brought to the game of 
hockey, will be remembered as long as the game continues to be 
played in any part of the world. 

I send my heartfelt condolences to the bereaved family. 


Message on the passing away of Major Dhyan Chand, New Delhi, 3 December 1979 