
· . .:if \-'. --. ' . 

Democracy 

and 

··.··National Strength·· 

Come, Let Us All Work Together 

IN THE LAST few days, 
lakhs and lakhs of joyous people from all walks 
of life and all parts of the country have been pouring in to greet me. Now. 
upon assuming office, my first act is to express my deep gratitude for the 
mandate which you have given me with such trust and affection. 
I do this 
in all humility and in no partisan spirit. Our hand of friendship has 
been grasped by the people with overwhelming warmth and eagerness. 
This warmth and close involvement we intend to extend and deepen in our 
march towards the building of a new India of our vision. 

Our people fully realised that the solid economic, social and politic:al 
infrastructure, so assiduously built by .the. Congress over 30. years, was 
. allowed to be dissipated in just 30 moi1ths of the _Jl;l.nata Party and Lok. 
Dal rule: . We assume office in the wake of severe drought and acute . 
shortage of vital inputs, aggravated by negligence and mishandling, a 
year-and-a-half of strained industrial relations resulting in a loss of over 
five crore mandays, one year of non-utilization of half of our installed 
industrial capacity, a record deficit of over 2500 crore rupees, and sharply 
declining rate of growth of exports. The overall picture of the economy, 
gathered from officials, is far worse than even I had expected. 
Indeed, it 
shocking. The Janata Party government also sowed the seeds of 
is 
bitterness, confrontation, division and destabilization. 

this has no 

relevance. 

To us, however, 

I would not even have 
mentioned this aspect but for the fact that they have so regrettably lowered 
the quality of our democracy. 
In the name of democracy, they did not 
hesitate to perpetrate all kinds of irregularities even in the. election process. 
Today, our problems are vast in number, size and complexity. The 
interlude of non-concern and n9-n-governance has aggravated the position. 
The international situation is also a matter of grave concern. 
It will need 
time, tremendous hard work on the part of the Government at the Centre 
and the States, at every level, as well as the full co-operation of every man 
and woman to get back on the road to development all.cl progress. There 
is no room for cynicism or indifference. Our country needs the healing 
touch. We must all unite in a common effort to solve the problems of 
different sections of our people and different regions of our country. 

A democratic election gives the chance to make a new beginning of 
translating ideals into reality. We are pledged to the task of bringing about 
social justice, to providing opportunities to the people of India, our farmers 
and workers, our scientists. and engineers, our teachers and technocrats, 

Broadcast to the nation, January 14, 1980 

our artists and artisans, the middle class and, above all, our young people 
and all who are under-privileged. For this, we want to encourage and 
utilize . all available talent. 

Our commitment to democracy, socialism and secularism is a matter 
of faith. We cannot invoke the ideals of justice, freedom and equality 
without fully employing our energies in combating the evils of poverty, 
superstition and social injustice. This is too stupendous a task to allow 
any time or scope for mutual recrimination and vindictiveness. Divisive 
urges should be tempered with the spirit of conciliation. Malice and the 
politics of hate are self-destructive. Equally alien to the real task ahead 
are the oft-repeated confrontations, such as rural versus urban, agriculture 
versus industry, labour versus capital and the multifarious configurations 
among castes and communities. We have only one adversary-social and 
injustice. We have only one goal-to build a strong, self-
economic 
confident,. self,reliant, independent Inc:l.ia. 

Come, let. us all work. together .. 

Putting the Facts Straight 

to be present during 

I HAVE TRIED 
the President's 
Address, and specially c.aring the. speeches of the Hon. Me1nbers of the 
Opposition; but certain unavoidable engagements have prevented me from 
listening to them all. For this I am sorry, but 1 do get the main points put 
before me day by day. 

the debate on 

I mean no disrespect when I say that the debate from the Opposition 
side lacked any heart or conviction. Most of the arguments made' were 
feeble. Many Hon. Members are still continuing to flog the dead horse of 
Emergency. They are still to find their way out of the trauma of the past. 
1975 and 1977 now belong to history. We have entered 1980, a new decade 
which has started with challenges of gigantic proportions, internally in the 
shape of economic and social problems, and in international affairs, the 
threat to non-alignment and to our very security. The President's address 
was written when the government was about four-day old. Therefore, 
i'. is not very realistic of Hon. Members to expect that we would, at the time, 
be able to give details of how we are going to tackle these various problems. 
It was physically 
to get any precise view of the state of the 
nation at that time. 

impossible 

Reply to debate on the Motion of Thanks to President's address, Lok Sabha, 
January 30, 1980 

Anyone who tries to belittle the · achievements of the Congress rule 
during these 30 years can do so only by shutting his eyes to reality. 
In 
1947, we were a country newly emerging into 
independence after a long 
period of colonial rule. We had a political structure which was fragmented 
and an economy which was, in many ways, primitive. Different parts of 
the country were existing as different countries. Hon. Members will 
perhaps remember-and specially those from Bengal-about one of the last 
articles written by Gurudev Tagore. He said : "I know the British will 
leave India. The question before us 
they 
leave the country." And we are all aware of that condition. 

is in what condition will 

We laboured hard for 30 y~'l"S to build a nation that was politically 
viable and economically sound. We achieved a strong political unity in 
spite of the immensity and diversity of our people. We developed demo-
cratic traditions that survived through years of political strife. From a 
subject state, we grew to a free nation whose voice was listened to with 
respect in the .councils of the world. 

l have preferred to 
look to the future but,. becausethey have referred to certain things; they 
have left no option for me but to deal with some of the issues with which 
they seem obsessed. 

The Opposition has chosen to rake up the past. 

First, I would like very briefly to deal with the question of persecution. 
What did the Janata Party-in the Janata Party I include both the Janata 
the Lok Dal-do after the elections? My party had offered 
and 
full co-operation in any nation-building activity, 
in any programme 
for the welfare of the people. But what was the response of the Janata 
Party? 

Instead of allowing my party to function as an Opposition, a campaign 
of repression was unleashed against me, my family and my associates. 
There were a series of politically motivated con1missions set up. Apart 
from commissions, there were other enquiring authorities. We are told by 
the Home Ministry that there were 34 commissions. Tailored evidence was 
produced before them. The atmosphere in the proceedings, as I know from 
personal experience, reminded-one of Mediaeval Britain when malicious 
pleasure was derived in harassing the accused and also the days of 
McCarthyism in the USA when public hysteria was whipped up and 
distortion, concoction and intimidation were practised on a large scale 
through government-controlled media. Heads of commissions, judges and 
others were having meetings with the Prime Minister and the Home 
Minister. 

Dozens of cases were started against my son. Officials close to me 
were harassed and intimidated; and not only they-if they were guilty, well 
there is some excuse-but their relatives, their old parents, their sisters who 
had not very close connections with them over the years, all of them were 
Indiscriminate searches at their premises were 
- hounded· and persecuted. 

made. There were large-scale sealing of bank lockers, freezing of bank 
accounts of relatives, impounding of passports, starting income-tax cases of 
· relatives; and officers were subjected to investigation by special courts. Even 
parents were asked to explain about expenditure which was incurred before 
1947! I was asked how I got a certain cheque from some university in 1960. 

Besides arrests of former Ministers such as Shri Gokhale, Prof. 
Chattopadhyay Shri Bansi Lal, Shri Malaviya, Shri P. C. Sethi and others, 
I am going through it very briefly. 
top businessmen were also not spared. 
If I went into details, we could tell you some harrowing tales .. 

During the period from the end of March 1977 to the middle of January 
1980, ten CBI officers visited foreign countries in connection with the 
investigation of eight cases. 
the United Kingdom, 
Switzerland (Berne) Geneva, Stockholm, Frankfurt, Bonn, New York, 
It was said 
Washington, Paris, Singapore, Bangkok, Tokyo and Osaka. 
that the main purpose of these visits was to. obtain evidence against me, 
my family and my close associates. 
. . But you . all· know what was the 
. outcome. . I have 110 doubt that it gave an opportunity . cif combining 
business with pleasure. 

They visited 

But apart from this, the attitude! Our ambassadors were 

told 
immediately after the Government came into power to burn any pictures or 
any writings by me or my father, Jawaharlal Nehru. 

ATAL BIHARI VAJPAYEE : I challenge that statement. It is not true. 

PRIME MINISTER : I can understand the Hon. Member's embarrassment. 
An ambassador himself told me that he got these instructions. 

ATAL BIHARI VAJPAYEE : Let her disclose the name of the ambassador. 

PRIME MINISTER : . I have no hesitation in disclosing the name. 
do so to Shri Vajpayee. 

I will 

ATAL B~HARI VAJPAYEE : Why to me alone'! Why not to the House 
when you are making a public allegation? 

RAVINDRA VERMA : The Prime Minister has no right to say 
If it is true, let the order be placed on the Table of the House. 

this. 

I do not know who gave the order. 

PRIME MINISTER : 
I am only 
repeating what I was told. 
I am not interested in who ~ssued those orders. 
I was told this by an ambassador and I have no reason to disbelieve him. 
can also share this information that he is not a member of the Congress 
Party. His reply was that he would not burn them; if he was not allowed to 
keep them, he said, he would shut them up in a cupboard, and he did so. 

This was not only in External Affairs-the way the pictures were 
trampled upon. One Air Force officer told me that right in the beginning, 
he had a picture of my father, me and himself. He was told-I do not know 
at what level-by somebody who visited the office, to remove it. He said : 
"It is entirely a personal matter. 
I am not keeping it as a political gesture, 
it is a personal memento." Very soon after he was transferred, whether the 
transfer was connected with it or not, I do not know, but he felt in his mind 
that it was connected. 
It is not just one case. There are thousands of 
cases like this, not just one. 

Every effort was made to humiliate me in every possible way. Foreign 
ambassadors have told me. 
I am not going to reveal their names. 
It 
is only fair that the House should know. They are respectable 
people of high position in their countries. They have told me that they 
were. hauled up for visting me. Many of those who came to see me, came 
in taxies or walking. . So, this was the atmosphere created.· Anybody who 
. visited me, if they had anything to do with the Government; whether they 
.. were in university or any department which remotely ];lad some government 
· help,· they were haufod up. 

INDRAJIT GUPTA : What does 'hauled up' mean? 

PRIME MINISTER : Well, 
wanted government support to continue. 

they were called and asked whether 

they 

PROF. MADHU DANDAVATB : You are describing Emergency conditions. 

PRIME MINISTER 
: Thank you very much indeed. That is exactly what 
I am saying. These were carried out by those people whose main slogan 
was their belief in democracy and in the freedom of the individual. We 
did not bring Emergency through the back door. We brought it openly. 
We did not arrest anybody from the back door. Everybody knew that 
these people were being arrested. 

I have heard that some of the films taken when I visited the forward 
areas were also destroyed by the Information Ministry. So far as I know, 
the Hon. Minister at that time acknowledged that they were lost. 

The hand of the R.S.S. was clearly visible in the administration, the 
manner in which the Hon. Member here has spoken about riots and various 
other incidents that took place, the manner in which the R.S.S. infiltrated 
into various strategic positions in education, in administration, in the 
police force and various other areas. 

Was not my expulsion from Parliament, immediately after winning 
election, an insult to the people of Chikmagalur, and to the democratic 
process itself? Was it not bulldozing by the majority? 

We have said that we do not want to be vindictive. But the facts must 

come out.· 

Ah effort was made to distort even the previous history, not to talk of 

recent history. We know the Hon. Members from the Jan Sangh. 

ATAL BIHARI V AJPAYEE : We have nothing to do with the Jan Sangh. 

PRIME M~NISTBR : I think the gentleman, who has been busy trying to 
prove for some years as to how the Taj Mahal was a Hindu temple, belongs 
to Shri Vajpayee's party. This may be an extreme case. But there are 
many things in between which are equally dangerous to the survival of the 
Indian tradition which is a tradition of absorbing, of synthesis and of great 
tolerance; it does not believe in falsehood or in rubbing out something 
which some do not happen to approve of because it does not suit their 
picture of India or what they want to do. 

Now, the neglect of fundamental development by the Janata Govern-

ment was matched by equal irrespoµsibility in the day-to-day management 

.. of the affairs of the country-· political and economic. 

Members have spoken ~bout the sharp deterioration ii:1 the law and 
· order situation and the sense of insecurity particularly among the weaker 
sections and women. Some have said that they have continued. Of course, 
they have continued. Can we change it suddenly? But certainly I think 
that already there is a slight change. 

With regard to communal clashes during the last three years, the 
minorities have suffered because of the increase in communal incidents. 
In 1975, there were 962 people injured and 33 ·killed. In 1976, there were 
794 injured and 39 killed. The very next year, 1977, 
the number of 
people injured went up to 1,119. In 1978, the number of injured people was 
In 1979, the number of injured was. 2,346. The number of dead 
was 260. 

Casteism and caste feeling have been the features of Indian society for 
centuries. At the beginning of the post-Independence period, there seemed 
to be a lessening of aggressive caste feeling, but with the coming in of 
democracy, it came up again because people looked to caste for support. 
However, as soon as they realized that this support was not enough to balance 
the hopes of other castes, again we found a lessening of caste dependence. 
During the Janata and Lok Dal rule, not only did we find caste in our 
political life and in our public life, but casteism and communalism were 
injected into our institutions of higher learning. Our civil services and even 
such innocent-looking programmes like adult education were vitiated. Even 
in the Lok Sabha elections, the effort was to fight on the basis of casteism 
and communalism in the vain hope of winning elections by misleading the 
people. 
I think this election has proved that our people are much more 
broad-minded with an overall national outlook than ~any of our friends 
opposite would like them to be. 

As for crime against scheduled castes between 1975 and 1979, the 
number of cases reported in 1975 were 7,781. 
I am skipping the middle 
In 1978, the number was 15,059. In 1979, up to September, the 
portion. 
number was 10,492. Crime in Delhi went up again from 23,105 in )976 
to almost the same figure in the first half of 1979-21,307. Figures are 
sometimes boring but since the others have quoted some, I think I am going 
to bore you with them. 

The Hon. Member, Chaudhury Charan Singh, said something about 
foodgrain production. In 1950-51, the production was 52.58 million tonnes. 
In 1973-74, it went up to 104.67 and in 1975-76, it went up to 121.3. 
We certainly did import foodgrains because we were determined that our 
people should not starve. 

ivIADHU DANDAVATE : During the Janata rule, it went up to 126.5 

PROF. 
million tonnes. 

: Production did go up .. We are not belittling that. 

PRIME MINISTER 
But you b.ad excellent rairis whereas in the other periods, we had faced . · 
serious·droughts. YoU:had years ofvery good rainfall. What is the result · · 
this year? This year, food is not available for the drought-affected areas, · 
although when we left a surplus, we were then told that there was enough for 
two corn,ecutive years of drought and there would be no difficulty in the 
country. 

Coming to irrigation, we started off with a mere 22.6 million hectares 
of utilized irrigation potential in 1951. By 1977-78, there was an increase 
of 26 m.illion hectares. I have not got the middle figure. But the figure for 
1973-74 was 42 million hectares. There was an increase during the Janata 
rule, but I think Hon. Members will realize that this is the result of the 
investments in the years before 1977 on irrigation projects. May I ask how 
many new irrigation v.rojects were put up and would they yield 
results 
immediately even if you had begun them in 1977? At least in one place, a 
bridge, that was built by us was listed as an achievement of °fhe Janata 
Government, because it had not been formally inaugurated during the 
Congress regime. 

About industrial production, we built the sinews of industrial strength 
through the development of the core sectors of coal, steel and oil and the 
expansion of the transport infrastructure and induction and generation of 
a wide range of technologies. The index of industrial production in 1951 
was 100. 
In 1977, it had gone up to 389.2 Similarly, coal production in 
1973-74 was 81.8 million tonnes; in 1976-77, it was 100.8, in 1977 up to 
November, it was about 65 million tonnes. Saleable steel 
in million 
tonnes : 4.47 in 1973-74, 7.41 in 1976-77, and the provisional figure for 
1977-78 was 5.08. Railways : in 1973-74 it was 162.1 million tonnes. In 
1976-77 it went up from 162 to 212. 
In 1977-78, it came down to 210 and 
in 1978-79, to 199. 

In the first eight months of 1978, 19 million mandays were lost. 

In 
the corresponding period of 1979, about 30 million mandays were lost due 
to industrial disputes. 

· Chaudhury Sahib made a statement about India going down from 1966 
in the list of countries. 
I am told that this is because of number of countries 
· has increased, and, looked at it from that angle, the position in 1976 had 
considerably improv_ed compared to that in 1973. 

Export Trade : From 1974-75 to 1976-77, the average annual rate of 

growth was 26.8 per cent; from 1977-78 to 1979-80; it was 6.2 per cent. 

The Janata Party increased our import bill. In 1973-74, imports were 
of the order of Rs. 2,955.4 crore in 1977-78 they rose to Rs. 6,025 crore. 
This was partly due to the need to go in for heavy imports of items such as 
steel, cement, coal and aluminium to meet shortages in domestic 
production which had been allowed to develop due to inefficient utilization 
of existing capacity . 

. That is how there h,as been a, rapid widening of our adverse balance of 
trade and we are ill-equipped today to pay for the · petroleum and other 
costly imports which we desperately need from abroad. . 
It is not true that the large buffer stock of foodgrains was built up with 
imports of food. We did import food when it was necessary, but gradually 
we had built up stocks to make us self-sufficient in foodgrains. That is how 
the Janata Party Government was able to export some soon after coming 
into power. 

In March, 1977,_ the national buffer stock of foodgrains was 18 million 
tonnes. This was the result of a massive domestic procurement which itself 
was a consequence of the steps taken by the government my time to make 
Indian agriculture more productive. 

From 1966-67 to the period when my Government laid down office in 
1977, the national income· at constant prices increased from Rs. 27,298 
crore to Rs. 40,534 crore, yielding an annual compound growth rate of 
4.03 per cent. In 1978-79. the rate was 4.06 per cent which is similar to the 
growth rate often years. A long-term growth rate of 4.03 per cent in ten 
years with fluctuations in agricultural production is much more difficult to 
achieve than 4.06 per cent in a year of good monsoon. 

Export of engineering goods increased from Rs. 356.6 crore in 1974-75 

to Rs. 566 crore in 1976-77. 

Many Members have expressed their concern over the problems of 
agriculture. The Hon. House knows how very anxious we ourselves are. 
Chaudhury Saliib has been pleased to state in his election speeches that I 
cannot tell the difference between a cow and a buffalo! Hon'ble Members 
can themselves judge the seriousness of such remarks. 
I am not called 
upon to be a judge at either cattle shows or buffalo shows, but I was 
concerned during my years in office to see that our farmers get remunerative 
prices. Their complaint was that the experts, who sit in the Agricultural 

Prices Commission, know nothing about the difficulties at the field level and 
that our Government always accepted their opinion. Well, we went into 
this in great detail, and we had many discussions with the Hon. Members, 
and on the whole we tried to give farmers a fair deal. But whatever price 
was agreed to was regarded by us as a support price. 

But what happened in the last two years? The peasants did not get a 
proper price for sugarcane or for other crops. When I went to the Faridkot 
constituency from a distance I thought snow had fallen because there were 
piles and piles of white Narma cotton. Nobody was buying it in U.P. 
I have not ascertained this from government sources; the farmers told 
me before the election and during the campaign that they were not able 
to get the price as declared by the government. 
It was when most of 
them had sold their produce at a lower price, almost at distress rates, 
that the government came forward and announced 
the higher . price. 
What happens? Those farmers who had already sold their stock could 
not get that price. 

CHANDRAJEET YADAV : It has been a regular feature for the last SO niany 
years. 

PRIME MINISTER : The farmers told me that this did not happen before. Why 
should they come specifically to tell me, if this was an earlier experience? 

INDRAJIT GUPTA : Every year they are suffering, why should they not 
tell you ? 

PRIME MINISTER 
: Regarding many other matters, people have not 
hesitated to say : "This is our problem, it is a long existing problem, please 
look into it", but thi~ time they did not say so. 

Because of their experience with sugarcane, people today are not in a 
mood to plant sugarcane, and we are threatened with a shortage of sugar in 
the coming season. This sort of thing has not happened before. Farmers 
were planting more and more because they were getting a proper price. 
When you do not get remunerative price you are bound to feel that since it 
is not a payjng crop why should I depend on it. This is just what I am saying, 
Shri Gupta. What I am trying to put across is : had this happened in the 
previous years at the same level, those farmers would have been discouraged 
then also from planting those particular crops. But they were not dis-
couraged, they planted more of sugarcane, more 01' everything. Now, for 
the first time they are sayjng that since this is not a paying crop, they will 
not plant sugarcane. This is the fact. 

SAMAR MUKHERIBE : This has happened in the case of jute, tobacco and 
cotton. 

P~MB M~N~STER 

: No. 

SAMAR MUKHERJEE : Because you vistedt hat place, they came up with 
this problem. 

PRIME M1NiSTER : They also came here to visit me. All I can say is that 
we shall certainy look into this problem. We do not want our farmers 
to suffer. 
I do admit that these policies have to be planned in a far . 
more long-term perspective. We ~end to take decision in a somewhat 
ad hoc manner, dealing with immediate problems. 
If I go wrong 
somewhere, I have no hesitation in admitting it. Somehow we were always 
caught in last moment decisions, and this caused some problems. Now we 
must attempt a 

long-term perspective. 

My colleague, the Minister for Agriculture, has already dealt with the 
· measures, which we propose to take to alleviate the sufferings of our people 
in the drought-affected areas. 
I should like to mention particularly that 
we shall arrange for close monitoring of the dro11ght situation and take an 
active interest in . the pro"pei: implementation of the Food for. Work · · 
Programme. The protection of cattle will also receive· greater attention .. 
Several Hon. Members have spoken about unemployment. It is indeed 
a matter of grave concern, and, it is at the root of many other problems 
which arise, whether it be a law and order problem or even, I would 
say, a very serious situation in our north-eastern region. We can certainly 
have short-term measures, but basically, employment can be created 
when the econmnic problems are solved and not just by having deadlines. 

Many Hon. Members on this side have spoken about the rolling Plan. 
We have always regarded planning as a tool for economic and social change . 
. During the entire period of the Janata and Lok Dal rule, the Five Year Plan 
could not be finalized even by the Central government, let alone having 
consultations with the States. 

I am astonished that any Indian should ignore all these achievements 
in agriculture and industry, which have taken place. As I have said in my 
speeches, I a111 not responsible for them, it is the Indian people through 
their labour and sacrifice. The farmer has increased his production, the 
industrial worker also through bis own work. 
I am not going to belittle 
their contribution because that is the main thing. But how were they able 
to do so? Because we gave them a policy, because we gave a definite 
direction. The same is the case with our young scientists and technologists. 
Today, India has the third largest reservoir of engineering skills in the whole 
world and one has only to look around and compare our political and 
economic situation with those of the countries which have acquired 
freedom in the post-war period, to judge our record in a proper perspective. 
'fhose who try to decry our performance show an utter lack of national 
pride and faith in our people. 

I have mentioned about drought relief. Just today, I had a very large 
contingent from Madhya Pradesh, also MPs from Madhya· Pradesh, 
Rajasthan, U:ttar Pradesh, Bihar and other States which have been 
suffering from drought. They came to see me regarding the inadequacy of 
relief work and the low wages which are being given to them. They have 
repeatedly complained about the lack of availability of various essential 
articles, and, that recovery of loans was being done even when farmers 
were in such deep distress. 

There are two matters which have n9thing to do with drought but 
which I must mention here since my attention was drawn to them by the 
large crowd that came from Madhya Pradesh; they were also mentioned 
by MPs from Rajasthan, and yesterday my Hon. friend and colleague Shri 
Kamalapati Tripathi also told me that this was happening in U.P. also. 
The State governments in these places have begun vigorous programmes of 
sterilization and demolition of huts of Harijans and they are propagating, 
"We 
the: Indira Gandhi government co:mes back, 
. sterilization will be renewed. These are instructions received from Centre.,,.· 
this Hon. House that no such instructions 
have gone from the Centre. This is typical of the manner in which they were 
previously spreading falsehood and now also they continue to do so. 

I should like to tell 

told you, when 

My Hon. friend has raised the question of stoppage of relief work. 
During the flood situation in Delhi-I forgot whether it was 1977 or 1978-
when I visited the affected areas, we found that those areas, which had voted 
for our members to the Corporation and the Metropolitan Council, were 
It was only when we made a big noise that t.he rations 
denied their rations. 
It just shows their 
were resumed. 
attitude. 

I am not going into all these things. 

I am not mentioning the names of all the Members who have spoken. 
But I should like to express my appreciation of the note of sobriety which 
Shri J agjivan Ram brought to the whole debate. He referred to the need 
for radical changes in the system for the abolition of poverty and the 
solution of our economic problems: 
I wish he had spelt out his ideas and 
told us what radical steps he had in mind consistent with the sort of · 
democracy that we have in India. 

Another friend 

the Marxist Party underlined 

the need 
for fundamental changes in the system. He cited the example of China. 
It is interesting to see how international politics move. During the war in 
Vietnam, when we were supporting the Vietnamese, we were consistently 
told by the United States and other Western countries that they were 
fighting in Vietnam only to protect us from China; that the great threat to 
India was from China and, therefore, it was very wrong of us to support 
Vietnam since the Chinese were also helping the Vietnamese against USA. 
We were consistent in our policy towards China. In spite of the fact that we 
had suffered aggression-at that time not only were there no relations, there 

was hostility-we continued to support China's entry 
into the United 
Nations for the very simple reason that a larg-e nation whose population 
is one-sixth: of the world cannot be left out of any international decision. 
Whether we like their viewpoint or not is an entirely different matter. We 
were not at all opportunistic; we were consistent in our policy. 

Now let us come to the socialist system. From violent hostility, the 
Western world and some friends from the Jan Sangh and others sitting 
opposite switched over to a feeling of euphoria, saying that everything 
was perfect in China-unemployment has been wiped out, everybody had 
food and so on. Not 
read of unemployment 
riots in some cities-in Shanghai and other cities. Then we read that this 
country, which was supposed to have attained high industrial development, 
is now totally dependent on Western help for its industrial development. 
Furthermore, they are partners with the USA; I do not know if the USA 
is a socialist country! . Does the Hon. Member want us to go back to that 
position? Perhaps· we have moved slowly .... We have not been able to 
eradicate poverty, nor did we ever say it could be eradicated so soon: 

long afterwards we 

SAMAR MUKHERJEE 
She knows perfectly well why we· prefer, 
on son1e issues, the Chinese Government. She knows that what I said 
was about their economic system. They have solved the unemployment 
proble1n; they have solved poverty. The question is China has begun 
a programme of being the first inodern country within this century. That 
is why they are taking the help of technology from all countries including 
India. That does not 1nean they are dependent on Western countries 
mainly. 

It is not correct. 

far as 

I have, But, so 

PRIME MINISTER : The Hon. Member may have greater inner information 
than 
Chinese have not been able to make much industrial development. They 
have got a number of atom bombs, but their industrial base is not a strong 
one and the various experiments they carried out with regard to small-scale 
production of steel, etc., are now regarded to have been not as successful 
as they were thought to be at that time. 

I understand 

the situation, 

Furthermore, ihose other Members of the Opposition, who are now so 
loud in their condemnation of Soviet troops in Afghanistan, had not a word 
to say when Chinese ttoops entered Vietnam. 

Now, even in the very short time that we have been in office, there 
has already been a marked change in the perceptions of foreign countries 
of our willingness and ability to play a useful and constructive role in 
international affairs. 

In recent months, 

the · world has moved- dangerously closer to 
thern10 nuclear confrontation among the big powers. The atmosphere of 
the cold war has been revived with all its negative consequences. We hear 

even quite responsible people being carried away by emotions and indulging 
in talks of mobilization for war, limited nuclear war, flexible response_ 
and so on. 

We must realize that, in this armed-to-the-teeth world, the slightest 
miscalculation may end in an unprecedented catastrophe for the entire 
human race. Therefore, in what we say or do, we must take into account 
all the factors and in our own humble way try to defuse the crisis. 

We are convinced that only in an atmosphere of universal peace can the 
resources of the world, both financial and technological, be available for the 
mutual benefit of humanity. Therefore, we are anxious that the present 
drift towards a hot war should be stopped by the combined efforts of all 
right-thinking people in the world. 

Hon. Members are rightly concerned about development in Afghanistan 
and the decision of the United States, China and some other countries to 
I should .like Hon, Members to bear with me 
rush arms to Pakistan. 
. because once again I should like to give the background of the situation ... 

I want to . draw the attention of the .· House to the· sequence of . 

developments in Afghanistan. 
It is a strategically located country. Some 
years ago-We all know what happened when we were not free; I am not 
going into that period-the monarchy was overthrown and Afghanistan 
In April 1978, 
became a Republic. President Daud took over power. 
another revolution took place and President Tarakki came at the helm of 
affairs. 
In November last, he was overthrown by Mr. Amin. Again in 
December last, President Amin was overthrown and now President Karmal 
is the Head of the Government. 

To my Hon. friend from the Muslim League, I would say again I cannot 
vouch for this but we have been told that it was in the time of President 
Amin himself that help was asked for from Soviet union 

There have been problems between Afghanistan and Pakistan. It was 
a legacy of the colonial domination of this sub-continent. What happehed 
in Afghanistan was an internal matter of that country. For the past two 
years, the Afghan Republic has faced numerous 
internal and external 
problems. There have been reports of armed attacks from bases located 
outside the country. We are told that the Government of Afghanistan 
invoked the provisions of the Treaty it signed with the Soviet Union and 
asked for military help to meet the threat to the Republic. Whether the 
request for military assistance was right or not, whether the Soviet Union 
should have rushed military aid or not, is a matter on which there is division 
of opinion among the powers of the world. Each one is looking at the 
problem not at all from the point of view of the people of Afghanistan, but 
from geo-political and strategic considerations. This will further complicate 
problems without sol.ving anything, 

I have stated our own view, which is that we do not approve of foreign 
presence or intervention anywhere in the world. However, we do not 

believe in a one-sided condemnation. We have been watching with concern 
the build-up in the Indian Ocean and some other countries, which is now 
being stepped up even further with Pakistan becoming one of the important 
bases for this. 

It is necessary to reaffirm our commitment to non-alignment and to 
emphasize the independence of our judgement on each issue, which is not 
going to be affected by pressures from any quarter. Our geo-political 
situation, our commitment to certain fundamental principles, our historical 
experiences, particularly since the days of Independence and, above all, 
our national interests, will be the determining factors in our foreign policy. 
As I said, there is a deliberate effort to label us as pro-this or pro-that. 
We are not pro-any country except pro-India and this is what we intend to 
remain. When we judge these issues, we judge them from the point of view 
of our national interest and from what we consider to be in the interest of 
world peace. 

All our efforts are directed at securing the speedy withdrawal of Soviet · 

troops from Afghanistan: .. Many big and small powers are involved. The 
· training of armed hands,. providing· bases, entering of armed trqops across 
the border and inhabiting another country and some other such activities 
do not create confidence among neighbours. . They only prolong the misery 
of the people concerned and create conditions of hostility among the 
nations. 

We cannot but feel disturbed by the reaction of some powers over 
these developments in Afghanistan. Billions of dollars have been asked 
for and hundreds of millions have already been committed to Pakistan in 
military aid by the USA. Other powers are being persuaded to make their 
own contribution to convert Pakistan into an arsenal. The People's 
Republic of China has also pledged to provide arms and other necessary 
assistance to Pakistan. 

Already, contrary to the expressed desires of the littoral States, a naval 
build up has been taking place in the Indian Ocean and huge armada is 
being deployed in the Arabian Sea. This is being done in the name of 
securing free flow of oil from the Gulf to the industrialized West. This is 
bound to have reactions, and the Indian Ocean in our region has become an 
arena of super powers.K Old treaties are being invoked and new ones are 
being forged. Appealtiavtbeen made to the religious sentiments of the 
people of Western Asia by outside powers. We know from experience how 
and against whom these weapons have been used in the past. 

We have conveyed our views to Pakistan and the Governments of the 
United States, Soviet Union and other countries. We have once again 
told the leaders of Pakistan of our 'sincere desire to promote friendly 
relations and co-operation 
in every sphere in the spirit of the Simla 
Agreement.·· We hope that neighbouring countries will avoid getting 
involved in this geo-political game of one or another super power and 

DEMOCRACY AND NAT~ONAL STRENGTH 

respond positively to the hand of friendship and co-operation which we 
have extended to them. 

We want to improve relations with China, consistent with our national 

· interests and the five principles of peaceful co-existence. 

As the President has stated in his address, we shall further strengthen 
and deepen our friendly relations with the Soviet Union and consolidate our 
co-operation with the United States. 
I want to make it clear that our 
relations with one country are not at the cost of our relations with another. 
As a sovereign and independent nation we act in the best interest of our 
people and the cause of world peace and co-operation. 

Some Hon. Members have referred to the Islamic bomb. Nuclear 
bombs and other bombs are weapons of mass destruction. There is nothing 
Christian, Islamic, Hindu or Buddhist about them. The production of 
nuclear bombs by any country in our region is bound to create a reaction 
in others, which will increase the suspicion and fears.of the intentions of the 
bomb producers. We have made it dear that.India has no intention of 
producing nuclea( weapons, but a(the same tinie we do not give up our 
right t.o use nuclear energy for peacefu,l and developmental purposes. 

General Zia-ul-Haq has told us that he will not produce nuclear bombs. 

We can only hope that he will honour his assurance. 

The situation in South-East Asia continues to cause concern. We 
do not subscribe to the view that any country has a right to teach a lesson 
to any other country. 
Instead of using the refugees for interfering with the 
affairs of other countries, conditions should be created in which those 
desirous of returning to their homeland may do so. Refugees should not 
be 1nade use of as pawns in their power game. 

However, this new variant of.the cold war is taking place in the setting 
of the international economic crisi~ fuelled oy the higher cost of energy and 
rise in the prices of industrial equipment. While the situation requires 
expansion of the world economy by free flow of capital and technology, an ·· 
ever-expanding world market and a new international monetary system, the 
cold war climax and the consequent military outbreak will close the avenues 
for their realization. The developing countries will be the worst sufferers; 
they will be subjected to pressures, inducements and even de-stabilization; 
they will be drawn into military conflicts. 
In such a situation, there is a 
danger of the backward states and the extremist elements being drawn 
into an adventurist action. We have to keep all these matters in mind while 
dealing with the extraordinarily grave and delicate international situation. 
We believe that the best way to ensure world peace is to break down 
barriers, East-West, North-South confrontation, and to try for the 
co-operation of all nations for economic development. 

An Hon. Member spoke about the minorities. 

I don't want to go into 
the details. We are deeply concerned with the question of employment 
opportunities for minorities and their other problems. We are equally 

conscious of the need for economic development for them and the develop-
ment of the Urdu language which I do not regard as a 
language of the 
minorities. People in every State speak Urdu. Initially, I had considerable 
difficulty in understanding the Hindi broadcasts of our Radio or the language 
used by various Hindi Departments. 

In the minorities, there are not only our Muslim brothers, although they 
are the largest in number, there are also many other minorities. We are 
equally conscious of their probiems and the need to help them, specially 
towards their development. 

While the Hon. Member was speaking, 1ny colleague Shri Shiv Shankar 
was telling me of the work done in Andhra Pradesh for the Urdu Academy. 
We started that programme and it has been well implemented in different 
cities of Andhra Pradesh. 

the 

criticism 

that 

111ade 

Some Hon. Members have 

the 
Presic).ent's Address lacks din:ction. 
I do not understand this at all. On 
• every important aspect of our national life, the President's Address spells 
out new directions -of government policy and govern11'lerit action, wl:1.ether 
it be in the field of law enforcement or planning for nation-building or the 
management of the economy or the welfare of the weaker sections. Our 
objectives are clear and are surely national in content. 
I do hope that all 
members of this House, whether in the ruling party or in the Opposition, 
will extend their full support and co-operation in this great task and in 
successfully meeting the challenges which confront the nation. 

Many amendments have been moved on the Motion of Thanks. 

have dealt with some of them in my remarks but I have not been able to deal 
with them extensively because that would take a longer time. But the socio-
economic measures, which will be unfolded in the coming months in further-
ance of the Government's broad objectives, will answer the amendments. 
So, I request the Hon. Members not to press them but to withdraw the 
amendments. 

K.P. UNNlKR~SHNAN : What about Assam? 

PRIME M~NISTER : I have spoken on Assam earlier. There is nothing 
specific I can say. Some groups are coming to meet me. We are trying to 
get in touch with the leaders of the political parties so that they can also 
come before Parliament ends. Perhaps you were not here when I informed 
the House that we have agreed to Shri Samar Mukherjee's suggestion that 
the leaders of the Opposition and we should meet with the leaders of political 
parties in Assam to try and find a solution. We are fully aware of the 
difficulties and problems of the Assamese people and also of the hardships 
and the sufferings which some of them have undergone, and the very brutal 
killing of some people. But anything that is said might aggravate the 
situation. That is why we think it is better to try to find a solution to this 

delicate problem and also to try and convince the people that however great 
be the problems, agitation is not the solution. If Assam deprives some 
region of some goods, then other regions can depr:ive it of other essential 
goods. Similarly; if there is reaction by non-Assamese, then that would 
only add to the suffering. So, at this time, all ofus must-however strong 
our feelings and I can fully understand the extent of your agony-show 
self-restraint and pool our energies to convince those who are indulging in 
wrong action and to assure them that the problems, which are worrying them 
will be solved, but it cannot be a one-sided solution. The whole picture 
has to be taken into consideration. 

PUTTING THE FACTS STRAIGHT-2 

SrR, THE DEBATB on the President's Address is an occasion to discuss 
important government policies .. It obviously cannot spell out all policies. 
rt can deal only wrth some major areas and some immediate problems. On 
our part also, we cannot deal with the entire range of issues within three 
days. Also, Sir, the Hon. Members are well aware that when the President's 
speech was written, the government was barely four-day old and we were 
not in a position to go in detail into various aspects as we did not have even 
the fuil knowledge of the state of affairs in the country. However, a number 
of important subjects have been covered by various speakers and I shall 
try to· deal with as many of them as possible. 

Before I get on to the more substantial things, I would like to deal 
the Lok Dal leaders did, not only to 
briefly with what the Janata and 
political opponents but also to the administration after the 1977 elections. 
It hfis now been repeated time and again that they did nothing wrong, that 
there was no persecution. 
I think all those who were even remotely in 
touch with our lives at that period are well aware of the campaign of 
persecution which was launched !lgainst me, my family, my personal staff 
and my colleagues. Entirely politically motivated commissions and 
inquiring authorities were set up-as n1any as 34, we are told by the Home 
Ministry. The manner of their functioning was similar to the witch-hunt 
period of the Middle Ages, whipping up hysterical campaigns against 
Judges and heads of commissions 
individuals and falsely implicating them. 
openly met the Prime Minister and the Home Minister to receive instructions. 
This was made obvious when the pronouncements made by the government 
were, in fact, carried out. 

Is this the independence of the judiciary? 

Not only were the so-called accused 

intimidated, even their old 
parents, close relatives and even distant relatives were threatened, arrebte<l 

From reply to the debate on the Motion of Thanks to the President's Address; 
Rajya Sabha, January 31, 1980 

took place 

In one case, the parents were asked 

and maltreated. 
Indiscriminate searches, at times when women were all 
alone at home, the sealing of bank lockers, the freezing of bank accounts 
of distant relatives, impounding of passports even in some cases where an 
entire stranger happened to have just a similar name, are indicative of their 
attitude. 
to explain · expenditure 
incurred on a marriage which 
in 1947. Several former 
ministers were arrested. Shri Gokhale (former Minister of Law) was 
arrested on charge for giving certain advice. Similar advice was given by 
Mr. Justice Shah of the Shah Commission to a private party. But no action 
was taken against him. Ministers and CBI officers went abroad several times. 
It would be interesting to lmow how much was spent on these visits. My 
own arrest, my expulsion from Parliament and subsequent imprisonn1ent 
are not hidden from this Hon. House and we have many people sitting here 
who took a very active part in seeing that I should not be spared in any way . 
. They shut their eyes and ears to the plain fact that no illegality or improper 
. action had taken place on our part and hence nothing could be discovered, 
no matter how many trips.they took abroad or within India, no i.nattel,'how 
much they tried themselves or with the aid of foreign investigating agencies, 
such as the Interpol. The last such visit by a CBI official took place in the 
beginning of this very month, January. 

Some Janata leaders have protested when I said that orders were 
passed that n1y pictures, my father's portraits, should be removed. 
I have 
been told by a colleague that there was a question in this House in which the 
answer was clearly stated that the P & T Department had given such an 
order about Jawaharlal Nehru's portraits. 

I would like to share a small incident with the House which took place, 
rather which came to my notice just yesterday. 
I received a letter. This 
It was given to one of our ambassadors. 
letter was written in March 1977. 
I received it yesterday with a covering letter, with the date after I was 
sworn in as the Prime Minister, saying that that was not the appropriate 
time to deliver this letter and, therefore, it was being sent now. The letter, 
I may add, was entirely non-political. It was by somebody who had written 
a book on the festivals, the culture and the tourist sites of India. But this 
shows the atmosphere which was created by the Janata Party and 
its 
government amongst our officials whether they were posted in India or 
abroad. 

Sir, the country is well aware how this campaign is still continuing. 
The J anata Party and the Lok Dal are not satisfied with what they have done 
in that period. They obviously are not satisfied with the result of the 
election and they have not ended their campaign. Some responsible people 
have complained to me that in Madhya Pradesh and other States such as 
- Rajasthan and U.P., forcible sterilization is now being carried out and the 

people are being told that these are the orders of the new Central Govern-
ment. 
I have written to the concerned Chief Ministers and I have no 

DEMOCRACY AND NAT~ONAL STRENGTH 

hesitation in saying that no such order has emanated from the Central 
Government. A similar situation has arisen with regard to demolitions of 
huts of Harijans and other poorer people. 

The hand of the RSS, which was seen <luring the last 33 months in 
administration, in police, in educatibnal institutions and in civic life, is still 
active. 
In Rajasthan and some other States, a widespread agitation is 
going on against the reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes and the 
Scheduled Tribes. Who is behind this agitation? In Parliament, the other 
day, we decided to continue this reservation of seats in legislatures. But 
these people want to create a type of class war on this issue. Our people 
believe that the State Government is encouraging this agitation. 

The Janata is not the only party persecuting us. The Marxists were 
allying themselves with the Janata until they were convinced that they had 
no majority. For thirty months, the leftists had forgotten all about RSS 
conununalism. They were a party to the Janata-cn,ated crisis and its serious 
consequences.· 
The sense of constitutional propriety of niany ·Ho_n. Members ~as 
benun1bed when the Janata Party dismisse_d Congress Governments in the 
States in 1977. How many had spoken up against their other irregularities 
and wrong-doings? When they had a majority, there was nothing wrong 
with the electoral system; there was nothing wrong with having a large 
number of seats. But, because we have come, it is said that the electoral 
system is to be changed : it does not really represent the people. This 
double thinking and double standard is typical of the Janata Party. Tliey 
are now belittling the decisive mandate by resorting to quibbling and 
statistical jugglery. 

We are advised on various platforms by the Marxists to adopt the socio-

economic philosophy of China which is now a partner of capitalist Eui-ope 
and America. We have chosen the path of democracy in all facets of our 
national life. We do not want to follow'the path which China has followed, 
the path which led them to total isolation until recently and the path which 
has now drawn them into the arms of capitalist society. 

In this House, mention was made by several Members to Centre-

State relations. The Constitution gives full rights to the States and we are 
anxious that these should not be diluted in any way. I have declared many 
a tiine that if there is any special difficulty, we will always be ready to 
discuss such matters with them. However, nothing should be done to 
weaken the Centre and lessen its capacity to help the weaker Stat.es or weaker 
areas or weaker sections or to handle the situations of crisis to strengthen 
and enhance the prestige of the nation. The Centre is also called upon to 
help in inter-State disputes, although the best way of solving such 
_ . differences is to have an acceptable arrangement between the concerned 
into detail by the 

This matter was also gone 

States themselves. 

Administrative Reforms Commission and they recommended that no 
change in the Constitution was called for. 

There has been a lot of shouting and anxiety expressed about the 
dissolution of the State Assemblies. Perhaps, this is the result of a guilty 
conscience of the Janata and the Lok Dal party. 
In 1977, they took the 
unprecedented step of demanding that various Chief Ministers should 
resign and dissolve their Legislative Assemblies or face action by the Centre. 
When they refused to oblige, 
the Centre at one stroke dissolved these 
Legislative Assemblies. The same people now loudly clamour that in spite 
of the verdict of the people in favour of our party, Assemblies in the States 
ruled by the Janata Party or the Lok Dal should not be dissolved. This 
shows inconsistency of their stand and the lack of principle underlying 
their argument. Numerous other people, such as Governors and others, 
were made to quit their posts at that time. 

I believe that there is also an effort being made that these State Govern-

ments should create as much difficulty for the Centre as possible in. the 
impieme:iltation of our declared objectives and declared programmes in our 
election manifesto .Some Hon. Ivfembers have moaned about stabilization 
cir destabilization. Who started this process? Agitational politics was 
resorted to from 1973 to 1975, taking advantage of the difficult economic 
situation that was fuelled by the international economic crisis, the 1nonetary 
crisis; the energy crisis, internal economy, severe drought conditions and, 
last but not the least, the burden of the Bangladesh war. The experiment was 
started in Gujarat and then extended to Bihar. 
It was the san1e people 
who started the process of destabilization in this country, who are now 
they who started the physical 
charging us of destabilization. 
assaults and civil disobedience, including 
the call to the army and the 
police to disobey lawful orders of the government. Even a hunger strike 
was resorted to for the dissolution of the Gujarat A~sembly. · External 
forces also assisted in the manipulations. 

It was 

Stability seems to have become a dirty word in the political lexicon 
of certain forces. Having worked for instability 
through inherently 
contradictory alliance, they now feel rebuffed by the electorate. On our 
part, we see stability as an integral element of progress and advancement, 
of a decisive thrust forward for change and development, of social transfor-
mation aud of political cohesion. Stability means not whether governments 
are changing or not changing or even how much majority a Government 
has. I should like to remind this Hon. House that for nearly a year and a 
half my Government was in a minority, but there was no feeling of insecurity 
anywhere in the country. 
is how the people feel. That the 
people felt insecure and they felt that the country was instable even when the 
Janata had 350 members, that is a fact of life. And that today with our 
coming they feel the opposite-that is also a fact of life. 
Therefore, 
mstability is not going to come whether a Government goes or stays, but 

Insecurity 

how the Government is functioning and how secure different sections of 
the people feel, how secure the weaker sections feel, how secure the 
minorities, whether they are the Muslims or the Christians or the Sikhs or 
the Buddhists, feel. · That is what security is. 
Assam is a very delicate subject just now. 

I sympathise with those 
who are suffering there, who are being denied various essentials. Every 
life is valuable, but specially of experts. We share the sorrow of these 
people with anguish in our hearts. 

But I also share the feelings of the Hon. Men1ber, who said here that at 
this moment, the major concern should be how to ease the tension, how 
to defuse hatred or dislike. And that cannot happen if we blame one 
another. This is why even when you know what is happening, you try not 
to talk about it, rather not to give it publicity. We can certainly talk about 
I have discussed this matter with the leaders of the Opposition parties 
it. 
and I accepted their suggestion 
that we should call the leaders of the 
political parties in Assam and discuss this matter with them so that we can . 
find a solution to which, we hope, . .they will also subscribe .. If we find a 
solution here and those people say: "We are not going to honour it"; it will .. 
not help us in any way· That is why it is important not to aggravate such 
feelings. 
I have personally seen during the language riots in Assam, how 
very sensitive and touchy the people become and the most innocent remark 
leads to an aggravation of the whole situation and it may even lead 
to 
somebody dying or being injured. That is why we feel that in such situa-
tions, we must be extremely careful with our words and our actions. 
It 
does not mean a lack of concern. 
In fact, it 1neans the opposite. So deep 
is our concern, so deep is our anxiety that we must, rather than talking 
about it, bend aI1 our energies to solve the problem while appreciating the· 
difficulties of the local people-but in 'local' there are people of all religions 
and languages-and appreciating the difficulties of all those who are today 
being called foreigners. 

Today, even th:ose who had settled in Assam in the wake of Partition 
and in the migration from what was then East Pakistan in 1964 are being 
branded as foreigners. People speaking non-Assamese Indian languages 
are being intimidated. 

Some initiatives have been taken. Detailed discussions with the 
I am 
Governor have taken place. The students are con1ing to meet me. 
In the meantime, we have intensified the 
meeting them tomorrow. 
patrolling on the border to make it more difficult for people to come in. 
Before we make other comments, we should wait until these meetings are 
over and see what is their outcome. 

An Hon. Member has drawn attention to the recent crime wave in 
It is obvious that this is a continuation of the crime wave which has 
Delhi. 
been sweeping the capital during the last 33 months. The number of 
cognizable crimes in Delhi is: 1976-23,105; 1977-35,856; 1978-43,383, 

and only the first half of 1979-21,370. This shows what a stupendous 
task we have before us to improve the law and order situation. 

Atrocities on Harijans were mentioned in the President's Address. As 
you know," I was one of the very few people-I do not know actually if 
anybody else went-to reach Belchi in very difficult circun1stances and at 
a time when my own party members there were very reluctant to allow me 
to go and had made absolutely no arrangements. 
It was only when my 
party and I expressed our determined wish to go there, even if we had to 
walk all night and we had actually started walking, that they hurriedly 
produced an elephant. That could only give some relief to three or four of 
us and the rest, including my Hon. friend Shri Sharma, had to do it on foot, 
even·swimming where the road was broken. And, of course, I do not want 
to forget the ladies. My friend, Kum. Saroj Khaparde braved it also and 
did the whole trip on foot. Now, about the atrocities on the Harijans 

*up to September 

. Number of cases 'reported 

These are all figures gathered at the time of the Janata Party ruie. 
As for communal violence, it is certainly understand!ible if concern 
was expressed for the rising trend in communal violence during the last 33 
months. But one Hon. Member went on to say that the violence was due to 
wrong policy of the Congress and that there was 110 communal violence 
during the Janata rule. I should like to quote some figures to refute the 
statement. Actually, there is 110 need for figures. You have only to see the 
feelings of the minorities themselves. You have only to go to J amshedpur, to 
Aligarh or to Pune or any of the numerous places where such clashes have 
taken place, and talk to the people. And the same 
is true about the 
Harijans. It is not what we did or we did not do. Even if we leave that 
aside what do the Harijans themselves feel? What have they said? This 
is the question, and this has been made very clear to me. 
In fact, it is my 
concern for them and 1ny. deep distress at the stories they told me as early 
as May 1977 or even earlier, perhaps, I think the end of April 1977, which 
urged me to go to some of the places which I visited and to come back into 
public life. Before that I was sitting quiet. These Harijans whose lands 
had been taken back from them, the Harijans who had been driven out of 
their villages, who had been driven out of their houses, and whose houses 
had been burnt, the Harijans in whose drinking water wells dirt had been 

thrown, and the tribals started coming to me almost immediately after the 
parliamentary elections in 1977 with facts and figures. I bad specially gone 
at that time to see the Prime Minister, Shri Morarji Desai, to tell him to take 
special personal interert to see that th.at was stopped and that they were 
accorded protection. 

Coming back to the Communal clashes 

No. of incidents 
No. of persons killed 
No. of persons injured 
No. of incidents 
No. of persons killed 
No. of persons injured 
The figure of incidents goes up to 
No. of persons killed 
No. of persons injured 

1979 : No. of incidents goes up to 

No. of p·ersorts killed 
No. of persons injured · 

I may add that these are Janata Party government 

figures. The 
figures given in the various cities where communal riots took place, and 
which I visited, were far higher than these. In fact, I doubt if the Muslim 
community which suffered, will accept these figures at all. 

I do not have to remind this House or the general public th.at the 
Congress has always stood for and promoted communal harmony in our 
country. Whenever there had been coml?-unal tension from the days of 
Ganesh Shankar Vidyarthi, Congressmen were the first to rush there to help 
in establishing peace and to help in affording relief to the victims. The 
leaders of the Congress Party were the first to condemn the communal 
violence. All of you know that when this violence has .taken place in the 
iast 33 months, members of the Janata Party themselves named some of 
their partners as being respo11~ible for the clashes. 

It is no wonder that the law and order situation worsened and that 
Harijans and minorities were the special victims of thi$ persecution. 
The police and para-military forces, which are normally expected to provide 
protection, were thoroughly demoralised because of political interference, 
which ultimately compelled some of them to go on strike. They had to 
resort to an agitational approach for the redress of their grievances. 
In 
this situation, the police was not eager to register cases when complaints 
reached them. They were not eager to chase the culprits when thefts took 
place. They were not eager to bring to book anti-social elements when 
Harijans and minorities were intimidated. 
In many instances, cases had 
to be withdrawn if the involved people belonged to the then ruling party, 
especially in the States. 

The Leader of the Opposition has referred to the misuse of mass media. 
I think, all our people on this side are well aware of the misuse of the media 
made by him and his government by distorting and suppressing facts, 
by giving repeated publicity to statements which were not substantiated 
. later, by overplaying news concerning not his own party but his group 
in that party and by coercing proprietors of newspapers to 
remove 
journalists who did not follow their line. The 1nedia lost credibility to such 
an extent that even solid supporters of the J anata Party confessed that they 
had to listen to foreign broadcasts for a more correct version of what was 
happening in India. 

Some Hon. Members Shri Piloo Mody and Shri Bhanu Pratap 
the last 
Singh from 
two-and·a~half years have been good years of economic growth. Whom 
are they trying to fool? 

the Opposition, have 

tried 

to 

that 

The facts are entirely contrary to this, as any report produced in their 
. . time by the Government will prove. . I can -only give some selected indica- .. 
. · tors. If you· want more figures,. they are easily available. The average 
annual rate of growth of Gross National Product during 1974-77 was 3;8 
per cent; from 1977 till now it is 3.2 per cent. The increase in index of 
industrial production then was 6.1 per cent, now it is 3. 8 per cent. Exports: 
9.9 per cent then; now 6.2 per cent. Electricity gene1;ation : 9.9 per cent then; 
now 7.1 per cent. Coal production : 8.7 per cent then; now minus 0.4 
per cent. Railways: revenue earning traffic-tonnez originating: 9.5 per 
cent then; now, 1ninus 3.4 per cent. 

The Hon. Member, Shri Mody, talked of the Janata Government bringing 
down sugar prices to Rs. 2.50 from Rs. 3.00 per kilo. He has ignored the fact 
that this was only a temporary phenomenon resulting from high production 
of sugarcane. Even this was brought about by the progressive policies 
towards sugarcane farmers followed in the past, which helped them to grow 
more cane. But the sugar policy was not steady and resulted in prices 
shooting up to even Rs. 6.00 per kilo from early 1979 onwards. Even the 
issue price of levy sugar had gone to Rs. 2.85 per kilo under the Lok Dal 
Government as against Rs. 2.15 per kilo when the Congress Government 
had left power. 
I might also say that the treatment of the sugarcane growers 
was such that for the next crop, many have decided not to go in for 
sugarcane. Hence we face a situation when there will be an acute sugar 
shortage. Why have they done so? Because they went to Choudhury 
Charan Singh and perhaps also to the Prime Minister, and they were told, 
"So much sugarcane?" This was their attitude. 
Instead of solving people's 
problems and trying to help them, there was always an attitude which created 
further difficulties for them and which was bound to create difficulties for 
the nation as a whole later on. 

There has been talk: ·also of stability in prices in the last 30 1nonths. 
What are the figures? The wholesale index average for the year 1974.75 

was 174.9; in 1975-76 : 173; in 1976-77 : 176; in 1977-78 it shot up to 
185.8 and it remained at that. Annual rate of inflation was 25.2 in 1974-75; 
the next year we brought it down to minus 1.9. In 1976-77, it went up a 
little to 2. But next year it goes up to 5.2 and for this year it was estimated 
at 17; but this is an estimated figure. Prices rose in 1973-74 and 1974-75. 
But anti-inflationary measures of the late 1974 resulted in a continuous 
decline of prices for the next 18 months. Prices rose by 20 per cent during 
1979. But the then Government, which was in a much stronger position 
because of food and foreign exchange reserves, could not control the 
inflation. Prices of serveral essential conunodities registered a very sharp 
increase from :tviarch 1977 to July 1979. There was a much bigger jump 
in respect of some commodities of daily consumption from July to December 
1979, causing all-round misery. This is wholesale price index. 
I have 
also separate figures for surveys which were conducted in· Delhi, Bombay 
and else where, which are even clearer but I do not want to take the 
time of the House. 

Now, I hav~ here figures of wholesale price index from March 1977 
to July 1979 in percentage. 011ions, which rose by 41.5 per cent in 1977-79, 
from July to December 1979, ,vent up to 139.8 per cent. Sugar, which rose 
by 2.8 per cent between March'77 and July'79, went up to 11.1 per cent 
during July to December'79. Cereal&, which rose by 4.3 per cent, went up 
to 10.3 per cent; edible oils from 5.9 per cent to 9.4 per cent. 

The Janata Party has claimed that the export of foodgrains under their 
Government was made because they stepped up agricultural production. 
Agricultural production cannot be stepped up as a miracle. It did increase 
in 1977-79, but so it did in previous years also. They had good rain and they 
had the infrastructure which we had built and which helped the farmer 
to increase his production. Food production increased from 69 million 
tonnes, in 1955-56 to 121 million tonnes in 1975-76. The export of 
foodgrains was made possible _only because of the bvffer stocks of 20 million 
tonnes which we had left in March 1977. 
These stocks were built by 
massive procurement in the years, 1975-77. 

Irrigation : I heard one Member quoting a Soviet expert. That expert 
rightly praised Indian planning in that context, because it was the proper 
planning and investment in the earlier years of the Congress rule, which ena-
bled the creation ofirrigation potential of this high orderin 1977-78. Irrigation 
projects take time to yield benefit. And, therefore, the benefits in 1977-79 
arose only from projects which had been planned and started much earlier. 
I share the deep concern of Hon. Members about unemployment. 
This problem has to be tackled by certain immediate programmes, and finally, 
to have a real impact, by development as' a whole. We have promoted 
programmes like the 20-Point Programme, small farmers' development 
agencies, . ~tc., which will increase employment opportunities. 
In the five 
years from 1972, these gave a high level of employment. 

In 1972, the size of the labour force was 240 millions and the level 
of unemployment 16.6 millions. 
In 1977-78, the size of the labour force 
was 273 millions, but the level of unemployment remained about the same 
(16.6 millions). This clearly shows that nearly 33 millions added to the 
labour force have found employment. 

What is the record of the Janata Party in this field? The number of 
job seekers on the Live Registers of Employment Exchanges increased 
sharply even in 1977-78 from 10.81 millions to 12.33 millions. This was 
the period when those Governments were talking constantly about relieving 
unemployment. 
In any debate, there is always a reference to Gharibi Hatao 
(Remove Poverty) and the increase in the number of people _ below 
the 
'poverty line' between 1966 and 1976. What is the source of the figures 
given by the Hon. Member, I do not know. In any case, those figures are 
not correct. According to the estimates made in the Planning Commission, 
the number of people below the 'poverty line' in 1968-69 was about 28 
crore, representing 53 per cent of the total population. By 1977-78, this 
had · come _down -to about · 49 per cent as the percentage of the total 
poptilation. Thes.e estimates can only be approximate and the rem9val of -
poverty is not something to be accomplished in a fow years. · It fs a process 
task. 
that viill take a long time and we must dedicate ourselves to this 
I myself have 
been travelling continuously, not from today, not since I am in office, but 
long before that. Except for some breaks while I was abroad, almost 
continuously I have been travelling either with my parents, or alone, since 
have b~en to places where there were no roads and places where I had to 
walk 12 .miles a day for several days and I have seen the changes in the 
people. There is change in the health, especially of children and women, 
there is change in the clothes they wear. Therefore, to go on saying tha.t 
nothing has been done in all these years is not a matterto be proud or, 
because you are denigrating not the Congre~s Party, but the people of India. 
It is their endeavour, their struggle and it is their hard work that has achieved 
this. What we have done is to help then1 by having the correct policy and 
by giving a definite direction in which they should move. But the endeavour 
and sacrifice have been theirs, whether it is our farmers or industrial workers 
or our brilliant, young technologists, engineers, scientists and professional 
people. 

I have, therefore, had the opportunity of seeing the changes. 

Figures and statistics_ give different types of pictures. 

The industrial production in 1979 has declined very sharply. There 
have been months together of zero or negative growth. This naturally had 
its impact on the external trade. Poor manufactures have necessitated 
higher imports. 
Items such as steel, cement, coal and aluminium-some 
of which we were exporting-are now being imported in large quantities. 
Imports have registered a growth of 18.8 per cent in 1977-78 over 1976-77, 
and 12.7 per cent in 1978a79 over the previous year. That also shows a 

highincrease during the period April to November 1979, when the percentage 
in the increase in imports touched 16.8 per cent. This has led to the widen-
ing of the trade deficit. The balance of trade has gone up in April to 
November 1978. The figure is provisional. In that period, it was minus 
Rs. 729.25 crore. And next year (April-November 1979), 
it was about 
minus Rs. 1181.3 crore. 

An Hon. Member complained that the public sector had languished 
during the Janata rule and asked what the new Government is doing. 
During our last year in government, i.e., 1976-77, the public sector had made 
a net profit of Rs. 239 crore. 
In the first year of the Janata rule, there was 
a net loss of Rs. 91 crore. What we built up brick by brick was damaged 
within two years. We have to motivate the workers and the managers of 
the public sector again to put in their best. They are capable of· better 
performance and I hav.e no doubt they will show much better results from 
now on. 

Before I go on to foreign policy, a word about Nagalanq. · I.should 
. like to assure the Hort. Member, who spoke about this, ofmy deep sympathy 
for the Naga people. P.erhaps he knows that when I first formed the 
government in 1966, there was severe fighting in Nagaland. 
It was I who 
took the initiative, called the leaders here, and as a result of long talks-
when at times it seemed almost impossible that they would yield any results-
we reached an agreement and Nagaland formed its own government and 
started on development work. 
I know it has a long way to go, but the 
people are talented and patriotic, and I am sure that, with their hard work 
and whatever help we can give, they will soon achieve a better standard of 
living. 

This applies not only to the N agas but to all our .tribal people. They 
have had a raw deal over the centuries, and it is our cfuty now-we cannot 
make up for this in a few years-to bend all our energies to do as much as 
possible, whether they are Mizos, Khasis, Garos or other tribal people in 
different parts of India. 

We must also assure greater representation to the Scheduled Castes 
and the Scheduled Tribes and the minorities in the spheres of service and 
national activity. That is not only fair to them but essential for national 
harmony and the strengthening of our society. 

We are committed to effective public distribution system. Y.i'e had 
just started to forn1 it. 
It was not easy for us to build up the system because 
that was a period of shortages. But we did hope that once the shortage 
was over, this system would be strengthened. Unfortunately, the Janata 
Patty does not believe in this type of service to the people and, therefore, 
they did not keep it up. Now, to build it again and make it effective is 
going to be one of the tasks which has to be undertaken. 

Our foreign· policy has always been consistent. The world today is 
at a critical juncture in the unending East West rivalry for dominance. We 

do not wish to be a part of this rivalry. In fact, we want it to be channelled 
constructively. We also appeal to our neighbours to realize that the history 
of the post-war period has unquestionably demonstrated that smaller 
countries have nothing to gain by becoming pawns in the battle of 
supremacy between the other powers. 

It has been our sad experience that arms given to Pakistan, for 
whatever purpose, have always been used against India. We are not afraid 
of Pakistan conquering India. But we are concerned that the induction of 
arms into Pakistan will encourage those who are against the process of 
normalization. 

We feel that the solution to the problem of Afghanistan should emerge 
from this region without interference by outside powers. We are prepared 
to initiate dialogues with our neighbours to achieve this end; and, we appeal 
to our friends not to fake any action that would frustrate this objective. 

There is not much that I wish to say regarding our foreign policy at 
this stage. Somebody has said tliat. there is confusion in my mind or that 
I have beeri changing .. I have not changed iny attitude. 
I inade it clear 
during the election campaign and that has remained our approach, since 
that is in line with our policy of non-alignment. Especially at this time 
our first and major concern is for the achievement of detente. We emphasise 
the stand we have taken. Detente was a big step towards lasting world 
peace. Unfortunately, now that has been thrown to the winds and once 
again we have the cold war situation. Europe has a genius of picking up 
problems, which are basically European problems, and putting them on to 
some other continent so that they themselves can avoid the unpleasantness 
and misery. The rivalry between the big powers has left the European 
borders and is causing tension in Asia. Our major concern today is not to 
see who is right and who is wrong, but to s~e how we can possibly prevent 
this cold war from turning into a fighting hot war. This is our major 
concern and that is why we are being extremely careful about what we say. 
The broad outlines of our foreign policy have been clearly defined in the 
President's Address. 
I should like to emphasise that the n1andate which 
we have received from the people has considerably enhanced the prestige 
of India in the rest of the world. The world sees in it a strong and stable 
government which is capable of projecting the right image of India and 
playing our traditional leading role in international affairs. 

We have declared our policy regarding Kampuchea even before the 
elections were declared and before there was any question of a manifesto. 
The Janata Party is very strong in asking us to condemn what has happened 
in Afghanistan. 
if they condemned the Chinese 
aggression in Vietnam or the bringing down of democratic regimes and other 
interferences in different parts of the world. As I said ~arlier, we have not 
changed our minds about these matters. They are consistent with our 
foreign policy which has been clear from the beginning, and we have no 

I do not remember 

DEMOCRACY AND NAT~ONAL STRENGTH 

intention of diverting from it. One Hon. iviember mentioned Kampuchea. 
I would ask the Janata Party whether they have not heard of the atrocities 
committed on the people there when half the population was wiped out by 
I have not heard a word of condemnation or ·any 
the Pol Pot regime. 
desire for democracy there or any such sentiment expressed by most of the 
Members sitting opposite here. 

One Hon, Member referred to India's relations with the ASEAN 
countries. We have established good relations with ASEAN countries and 
Just within a week of the formation 
propose to strengthen them further. 
of my Government, I had very useful talks with the Deputy Prime Minister 
of Malaysia. 

Mention has also been 1nade of the African people's struggle 

in 
Southern Africa. Our fi.rn1 support to.the African people for majority rule 
in Southern Africa is so well known that it needs no reiteration. 
It is a 
deliberate mischief to even suggest that there can be any change in our 
constant stand 1n support of the people of Southern Africa. Fortunately, 
the people who are involved in the struggle know me and my p·oiicies. · They 
know the support which we have always given 
shall continue to give them until they are fully free. One Hon. Member 
opposite knows of my very close involvement with the struggle in South 
Africa. 

them and which we · 

I have not dealt with the a111endments separately but have covered 1nost 
of them in my reply. 
I hope, the Hon. Members will not press their 
amendments now. The ·principal directions of the Government's policy 
have been set out in the President's address and in the coming weeks and 
months, this House will have an opportunity to consider various matters 
that the Government will bring forward to give a concrete shape 
to its 
commitment to resume.:the process of nation-building, a process in which 
I hope to have the co-operation of all sections of the House. 
I thank all 
the Hon. Me1nbers for the interest they have taken and the contribution they 
have made to this debate. Now that they have expressed their views in full, 
may I request them once mote to withdraw 
their amendments. The 
the Government and the nation demands the 
enormous tasks facing 
co-operation of all. 

Acts Against Harijans and Adivasis 
I SHARE THE feelings of anguish of all the Hon. Members. We are here 
as responsible Indian citizens who are proud of our country. Therefore, 
it is all the more our responsibility to cleanse our society of those blots-
shameful blots-which can only, as Hon. Members themseives said, cause 
shame to us and deprive us of our own self-respect. 

I have decided to reactivate the National Integration Council. 

It is 
It is {he responsibility of the Government 
not a solution; it is n1erely a tool. 
to assure our Harijan and tribal brothers and sisters of full protection. Also, 
the guilty n1ust and should be punished. 

This is not a new problem. As many have pointed out, it goes back 
· to thousands of years; it is not easy to pull out th.ose old roots. The causes 
are largely economic but into them are woven traditional social . attitudes. 

Whereas it is government's responsibility to protect its citizens, it is the . 

responsibility of all of us here, not only as :t\1embcrs of Parliament but 
as thinking, responsible Indian citizens, to work towards the ending of 
casteism and communalism, which are kinds of poisons which urge people to 
barbaric acts, lead them to forget that they are human beings and that others 
also are human like them, and have a right to live, to earn, to love and to 
work. 

This is something that cannot be removed merely by government 
It has to be a people's movement. 
decision or government action. 
Mahatma Gandp.i tried to.make it so. 
In our independence struggle, we did 
not fight merely for political independence; we did this, but part of the 
struggle was against economic injustice, against social humiliation of all 
Indians, especially of Harijans, Adivasis and the weakest who had no 
voice, and who had no organization, Today's situation is not the same, it 
has vastly changed; mainly it is this change which is part of the trouble, 
part of the cause of the trouble itself. As soon as they started reasserting 
their right; as soon as they wanted to stand straight with their heads up, 
a shower of atrocities and harassment descended on them. We are 
experiencing this also as a nation because this is the attitude of some of the 
developed nations towards us. They say how dare these poor people, who 
were cowed down, who listened to us, how dare they ~tand up and assert their 
rights. That is son1ething that we have to deal with as a national problem. 

When politicians are talking, politics comes in, no matter how much 
I certainly do not want to lay the blame on anybody. 
one tries to avoid it. 
What is past is past. But-we cannot remove the past; we have to be aware 

From speech in Lok Sabha. March 13. 1980 

DEMOCRACY AND NAT~ONAL .STRENGTH 

of the past. But now let us try to see how we can put our heads together 
and how we can_ create a right atmosphere. This is not something we can 
do just sitting here or sitting in the Integration Councils. 
It has to be 
done at the local level. If a group of people have to be protected, basicaI1y 
it is the neighbours who are going to protect them. 

It should be our task as Members of Parliament from these areas, from 
every area, because all of us have Harijans or tribals in our constituencies, 
to see how to create that atmosphere where people will not behave so 
barbarically, however much their feelings are aroused, even if they feel there 
is a cause for· revenge. One wrong is committed, immediately the 
aggrieved feel 
that they must retaliate. The only solution apart from 
taking all possible administrative and other measures for the protection of 
weaker sections as well as for punishment of the guilty, is to create an 
atmosphere that this is wrong, 
that is not done in Indian society and will 
not be accepted by society. 

There is no short-term solution. Much as I would like to say that I . 

think such incidents are not going to happen again, I cannot honestly say .. • 
· that. · We can only say that we shall try our very utmost, out' very best to· 
prevent such things from happening, and, I hope that in this effort we shall 
have the full co-operation of all sections of the people. 

Chhatrapati Shivaji 
. ·w E HA VE COME here from far off places on a pilgrimage to commemorate 

: and to observe the anniversary of a great man who lit the torch of freedom 
in India. The light of that torch has provided strength to the country even 
after the passage of hundreds of years and it has given us the inspiration to 
wage our war of independence. He was a great man not only for Maharashtra 
or for India, I think he ranks among the greatest men of the world. Since 
we were a slave country, our great men (whatever their standing) have been 
somewhat played. down in world history. Had the same person been born 
in a European country, he would have been praised to the skies and known 
everywhere; 

It would have been said that he had illumined the world. 
The war we are fighting in India today is a different kind of war. 

It is 
a war, not of swords or bullets, but of ideologies; it is a war for whatever was 
envisioned by Chhatrapati Shivaji-a vision of freedom and of India's 
greatness. Let us translate that vision into reality. 

Speech at the- 300th anniversary of passing away of Chhatrapati Shivaji, Raigarh, 
March 31, 1980 

I have had the opportunity to go to many places. The more I travel 
around the world, the more proud I feel about the people, the history, the 
traditions and the culture of India. And I regard Chhatrapati Shivaji as an 
embodiment of these. 
In the training I received at my home during my 
early life, the highest respect was reserved for those who had shown bravery, 
those who fought for freedom; and Chhatrapati. Shivaji held a very high 
place among the people who were _held up as a model for us. Not only in 
the letters written to me by my father, but through conversations, through 
the atmosphere prevailing in the country, tbis feeling was always kept before 
me as an ideal. Similarly, the youth of India, the young generation, has to 
march forward keeping this ideal in view. 

The questions before Chhatrapati Shivaji were different from those we 
face. There was the Moghul Empire and he fought it valiantly. All the 
historians and all the books written in that age had high praise for him. 
They praised not only his bravery and valour, and his strategy in war, but 
also his greatness of heart, bead and views. There was nothing small about 
him, 
In his. thinking, whether of religion or of anything else;· there was 
bigness and liberality. He was extraordinarily fat,sighted and therein iay 
his true greatness. Without that, whatever his valour, whatever his deter-
mination, he would not have become the great man he was and achieved the 
success he did. 

This is a very hallowed place. 

It was here three hundred years 
ago that Chhatrapati Shivaji passed away. But he had left behind a light. 
It is our prayer, to the goddess and to all other powers, that that inspiration, 
that light, may never go out in India. May it always keep the country 
illumined and provide the younger generation the ideals and ideology which 
will enable us to raise this country. 

Chhatrapati Shivaji had great love and respect for his mother. You all 
know that when he was twelve years old, Mata Jijabai gave him a plough, 
a model of which has just been given to me. It made him realize that the 
strength of the country depeu"ds not merely on the sword, but on the plough-
on the produce of the country, the condition of its agriculture and 
of its ordinary people. 
that his mother 
taught him. 

This was 

the 

lesson 

Although there have been a number of great men and women in India, 
not all of them had close contacts with the ordinary people. But Shivaji 
had a close identification with them and that is why people felt not only 
respect but love for him in their hearts. Even today when we look at bis 
portrait or reflect about him, it evokes a mixture of love, respect and pride. 
I, therefore, warmly thank those who have presented me with the plough, 
and the painters who have presented me Shivaji's portrait. They will be 
kept where they can be seen by the thousands of people who come to see 

- me every day from Maharashtra, Gujarat and from every corner of India .. 

and the world. They will see this portrait and it is my hope that those who 

do not know much about Chhatrapatiji will learn more from it and 
derive inspiration. 

Even during )lis lifetime, efforts were made to denigrate Shivaji as if 
he were a mere Hindu leader or a leader merely of Maharashtra. This is 
belittling him. As I said earlier, such a person is above all these narrow 
things. He was a good Hindu, a believer in his religion in the way, 
think everyone should have faith 'in his religion. But he was much bigger. 
He knew the greatness of Mother India. That is why he did not exclude 
anyone from his army, of whatever class he might have been. Merit was 
th.e only thing he looked for He sought out those who gave their best to 
his cause. This reflected his own greatness and was a major cause of his 
success. The great men who came after him in India had the same far-sighted 
If he strongly opposed Aurangzeb and fought him, it was 
perspective. 
not because the latter was a Muslim,. it was only because of Aurangzeb's 
cruelty, oppression and wrong-doing.. One has to fight such a person 
. whatever his race or whichever place he may .. belong to.· All this Shivaji 
taught us. 

I am greatly struck by orie saying in Dnyaneshwari which, like Swami 
Ramdas influenced him : 'Vishwachee Majhay Ghar' (The whole world is 
my home). This concept is as necessary today as it was then, perhaps a 
little more, because the world is becoming smaller and people move about 
more and are open to more influences. They do not try to know each other 
better. And it should be our effort to see not only with our eyes, but also 
with our hearts, our minds, so that we may understand. This is necessary 
within the country as well. 

What is it that we at times try to do in the name of provincialism or 
language or religion or race? We raise false artificial walls. We fail to 
march forward with noble thought, we fail to benefit by the knowledge of 
other people. 

From all points of view, therefore, we should try to imbibe Chhatrapati 
Shivaji's tolerance and his approach to the country's unity and freedom and 
I think that the truest homage to him · would be to regard 
patriotism. 
ourselves as soldiers in his army. We have no swords in our hands, but 
let us unite in the same battle against the same oppression and the same 
· evils and to strengthen the freedom of that very country, to make the image 
of Mother India more noble, whatever be the sacrifice or suffering. 

The challenge before us today is not the challenge of aggression. But, 
when battles had to be fought, you know that the people of Maharashtra did 
so. They laid down their lives or were wounded. But there is another kind 
of challenge today, the challenge of ideology. What is good for another 
country is sought to be imposed on us also. People of other lands do not 
relish it much when we declare : "No. This is India, we shall follow our 
own ideology, our own policy". For this we have to stand firm and I think 
Shivaji, if he were amongst us today, would have felt the same way. 

I wish to thank all of you for giving me this opportunity of being in 
your midst and of paying my homage and gaining new inspiration and new 
courage. 
I hope that you will all go back from here with a new inspiration 
and new courage. 

What Makes an Indian 
OvER THE YEARS, I have been called upon to address many university 
convocations. Even so, Delhi is something special and I particularly value 
the honour that you have done me. 

I do not wish to make this a ritual of giving advice to new graduates. 
Advice is a commodity for which there are more sellers than buyers. The· 
young especially have little patienc.e with opinicm.s. on how. to run their lives. 
Instead, I wish to share_ some thoughts on what makes an Indian. 

When I ceased to hold office in 1977, I was asked to write for a book 
on India in the belief that respite from the responsibilities of government 
would give me ample time. But things seldom turn out as we expect. My 
life continued to be one of continuous movement from place to place and 
an end.less stream of visitors from all lands. The hundreds of thousands 
of people I meet here or elsewhere give the opportunity of observing the 
similarities as well as the special characteristics of different parts of the 
country and the world. 

Even a casual traveller cannot but be struck by the extraordinary 
geographical and other diversities of our country and its equally amazing 
cultural oneness. Delhi is the Jndraprastha of the Mahabharata Age. The 
dominant impression emanating from the Mahabharata, even more than its 
grand philosophical message and its grasp of the main issues of life, is the 
message of the unity of India. Practically every region is described with 
loviug care and with a sense of belov.ging. Arjuna was at home everywhere 
and out of place nowhere. 

Even in those days of pre-history, there was full appreciation of diverse 
elements bound together in a common destiny. From the remotest times 
our diversity has implied acceptance and co-existence. Ancient India 
believed, as we do, that diversity itself can be a source of strength and that 
all people should not be confined to a single interpretation of Reality. From 
the sparkling snows of the Himalayan ranges, the verdant forests of the hills, 
across the broad plains of the Sindhu and the Ganga, came the proclamation 
of an eternal truth-that Reality is one, but is perceived as many. 

Convocation address at the University of Delhi, April 1, 1980 

DEMOCRACY AND NAT{ONAL STRENGTH 

I leave it to you to see how important this message is for contemporary 
man. Humanity's survival depends on the tolerance of people living 
their own lives and on the rejection of any conformity, which would negate 
the personality of nations, groups and individuals.' 

This race of ours has had such breadth of vision, such capacity to feel 
in harmony with vast spaces, and, to visualize great stretches of time, like 
the Kalpa which equals 4,320 million years, and which could conceive of 
"a glow brighter than a thousand suns"! This was the line from the Gita, 
which came to Robert Oppenheimer's mind as he witnessed the first 
explosion of the atom. What irony of hi~tory that such a race should so 
readily fall victim to narrow and self-stultifying creeds and counsels! A 
few fingers held close to the eyes are enough to block the magnificent 
panorama of the Himalayas. There are some amongst us who seem to argue 
that the part is larger than the sum. 

The starry n1oments of our history occurred when the vastness ii.nd 
variety of India were comprehended Ill a unified vision. · The · ancient 
heroes.· of our epics travelleq the . length and. breadth of the country, 
spreading the concept of Indianness. · This is why we specially cherish 
the memory of Ashoka, of Samudragupta, of Akbar and of Shivaji. 

Rashtrakuta Krishna or Rajaraja Chola couldn't rest until· they had 
bathed in the northern rivers. Rulers and warriors craved for digviiaya. 
Our resplendent spiritual leaders were heralds of our unity and "conquerors 
of the directions". Pilgrims came from far-off lands to venerate the foot-
prints of the Buddha, journeying to the eastern mountains and the southern 
and western seas. 

What can be more ennobling than the vision of that brilliant monk who 
was born in Kerala and who ascended the seat of learning in Srinagar, the 
Adi Shankaracharya! In the sixteenth century, Guru Nanak visited 
Kamakhya as wen as Rameswaram. Even the unlettered villager makes 
metaphor come to life when he sees the Ganga in every stream. With the' 
same natural ea~e and spiritual spontaneity, he honours the saints and shrines 
of all faiths. 

I have dwelt at some length on unity because I see a threat to it not 
merely because of agitations but equally through mental attitudes. What 
holds a country together? Basically, the people's love for it and willingness 
to work and sacrifice for it. Of course, this is not entirely altruistic, for 
each person knows that his interest is intrinsically bound with his country's 
future. As Chittaranjan Das said, "Who lives, if India dies?" 

The young want a cause to :fight for and something to rebel against. 
There is no dearth of it either in India or the world. Nor is there need for this 
attitude to change with age, but too often and too soon the zeal cools down 
or is dissipated in trivialities and irrelevancies. This and confrontation for 
its own sake or for narrow ends are self-de$tructive and even harmful for the 
nation. Let us not forget that India is a special country at a particularly 

crucial point in its development, when the world around is in turmoil. We 
It depends 
can get bogged down or we can pull ourselves out of the morass. 
on you, the younger generation and the intellectuals. 

There are, of course, immediate problems which cause worry. One can 

understand and sympathize the feeling of insecurity for fear of unemploy-
It is our n1ajor concern too because of the human problem and 
ment. 
suffering involved and because our progress depends on making the fullest 
use of our manpower. There must not only be enough jobs which befit the 
qualifications and expectations of our bright trained young people, but these 
jobs must also contribute towards strengthening the nation. 

Not many people can migrate to other parts of the country for work. 
So, it should be our earnest endeavour to provide the people jobs near home; 
but the 'sons of the soil' theory is a pernicious one which narrows down 
opportunity of ~levation to higher posts and deprives the region of more 
varied talent. Perhaps, it is natural to think that if the Bengalis go out 
. of Assam or . the Assamese · go out·. of Bengal or the Tamilians · froin 
Kamataka; or North .and South Indians from Bombay, conditions will 
improve and more jobs become available "for local people. · But there are 
no such simplistic solutions. And any such narrow-minded~ess, ·especially 
which leads to agitations, has reactions in other places, hits development 
and does not allow employment to increase. Some schemes help in the 
short term but basically there is only one solution to unemployment and 
that is, development in agriculture and industry in a big way. And that 
needs a nation-wide effort and nation-wide mobility on the part of experts 
and trained personnel. 

India's greatness has been her genius for synthesis of cultures and ideas. 
Through the ages, she has opened wide her doors to all who came whether 
It is not by putting restrictions or isolating 
to learn, to teach or for refuge. 
oneself that one grows but by wider contacts and interaction with fresh 
thoughts and new strains. Those cultures have survived and j:)ecome richer 
which have welcomed and encouraged such expanding experiences. Apart 
from India, the best example in our times is that of the USA, which promises 
inducement to attract talent and brains wherever they are found. 

The pitfalls on our path are diverse. Danger from outside lies in some 
form ofneo-colonialism and the unceasing effort of other countries to mould 
our policies to fit in with their global strategies, conceived in the light of 
their national interest. The methods devised may be subtle or overt, some-
times amounting to considerable pressure. Conditions are sought to be 
created in which our options are limited. The absence of positive proof 
of foreign activity does not make it non-existent. Our uncritical acceptance 
of foreign postulates, be they of the West or the East, be they of the Right 
or the Left, is 
in . itself an indication of how insidiously these influences 
work. We should not imitate other countries or other systems, nor is 
it our aim to become improved editions of them. We are Indians and we 

want to make our country a better India, unique in its history and 
experiences and unique in the future it envisages for itself. 

Education in its widest sense is how to produce balanced personalities, 
capable of meeting, without undue stress, the contingencies and vicissitudes 
of life. 

Although mankind has made great leaps in knowledge, our minds are 

largely imprisoned by old imagery and set familiar patterns. An example · 
of out-dated language, which Buckminster Fuller gives, is our reference to 
the "corners" of the earth, a left-over from the time when people had a 
different view of the shape of the earth. 

I have often spoken of the need for creative thinking but only the other 
day-in fact I bought the book at the recent Book Fair-I came across 
positive suggestions as to how to add another dimension to the thought 
process by giving it a lateral direction. According to the author Mr de 
Bono, the present vertical direction is concerned with proving or developing 
concept patterns while lateral thinking restructures such patterns (which 
is insight) and provides new ones (which is creativity}. One does not 
preclude the other. 
"The emphasis is . shifted from the · validity of a 
particular pattern to the usefulness of that pattern in generating new 
patterns". Mr de Bono points out that the purpose of thinking is not to 
· be right at every step but to use it for right conclusions. He gives examples: 
"Lee de Forest discovered the immensely useful thermionic valve through 
following up the erroneous idea that an electric spark altered the behaviour 
of a gas jet. Marconi succeeded in transmitting wireless waves across the · 
Atlantic Ocean through following up the erroneous idea that the waves would . 
follow the curvature of the earth." 

What do you expect from life? And how do you avoid disappointment? 

As a student I came across these lines: "If a person is primaril:ir · 
after wealth, the world can whip him; if he is primarily after pleasure, the 
world can beat him; bnt if a man is primarily growing a personality, then 
he can capitalize anything that life does to him." And that is half the battle. 
I congratulate all the young people who have got their degrees or have 
won other laurels. To them and to the students, I give my best wishes 
for the future. May they use their knowledge and their energies for the 
larger good of our people and of humanity. 

Agitation Hurts People 

EvER siNcE ASSUMING office some weeks ago, I have been wanting to 
visit Assam. 
I am glad to do so on the eve of the Bihu festival. To all 
the people of Assam, I give my good wishes for their New Year. I am sure 
that people from all over the country will join me in greeting you. 

Assam is one of our most beautiful and peace-loving regions. From 
the time of our ancient 1nythology, it is intrinsically linked with other parts 
of our land. Today, your normal tranquillity is somewhat ruffled. I have 
seen your deep feelings, and I understand your wish to preserve your local 
id(!ntity. To the rich tapestry of India,· each region; each State, lends its 

.. own distinctive colour and weave, 

. Sohitions to the problems that are agitating your mi~ds 1nust be found 

. and will be found. They should be· ar~iv~d at in goodwiil and a spirit of 

give-and-take. Huri1an relationships need ·mutual adjustments. Assam 
has always been a composite of diverse elements, reflecting the diversity of 
India itself. Our country's special genius is to let all live and grow together. 
When we counsel co-existence to the world, 
it is because we have seen that 
it works and has worked well in our country for centuries. 

You have apprehensions, and I am anxious that these should be allayed 
speedily. We are determined to deal with infiltrators. But any · action 
we take should be in accordance with, the due processes of law, with 
humanitarian considerations and legal and constitutional obligations. The 
deportation of infiltrators is continuing. Vigilance on our bo_rden; has 
been strengthened and, if necessary, will be further augmented. Recently,· 
we have placed restrictions on the acquisition of property by persons who 
· are not citizens of India. 

At 

the same time, we must remember that there are also other 
apprehensions. A large number of people in the State have told ine that 
although they are Indian citizens, they feel insecure because some look upon 
them as foreigners. 

If Assam is hurt, the whole of India feels the pain. 

If the whole of 
India suffers, Assam in turn is bound to suffer. The agitation here has 
caused great hardship to the people of the State and in the North-Eastern 
region. The State's own development programmes have come to a halt. 
I am also told that the availability of daily necessities to the common people 
has become extremely difficult. It makes me sad to see that while the State 
should be asking for more development funds, it is not able to utilize what-
ever is allocated. How can the State expect economic betterment if the 

Broadcast over All India Radio, Gauhati, April 12, 1980 

normal functioning of office_s, educational 
remains 
interrupted? To take only one·example, our doctors warn us that this is 
the time to tackle the growing malaria problem of the State, but if officials 
cannot function, how can anyone help? 

institutions, etc., 

Even so, I have taken the initiative personally to see that the State's 
requirements of essential goods like foodgrains, salt and sugar are met to 
the utmost extent. We have also set up a separate Committee of Ministers 
to review the development programmes of the State and the region, with 
e1nphasis on speedy generation of employment. A Cell is being constituted 
in the Planning Commission to service the Committee. 

The Government is doing its best to give :fillip to the economic growth of 
the State and the region. But should any part of the country deprive the 
country as a whole of its precious resources? And, when severe drought 
in many parts of our country cries out for all out efforts to provide fertilizer 
to farmers, diesel· for transport and pumps, kerosene for the house-wife, 
is it right to aggravate the difficult situation by· blocking supplies of crude 
to Barauni _(refinery)?. 
I want 
I know 
you all to do some rethinking. 
that your love of the country is in no way less than your love of Assam. The 
agitation today is like a quarrel wiihin the family. 
It has to be composed. 
You can be sure of my own sympathy. The Government, which I happen 
to head, will always be responsive to any grievance that is genuine. 

Will you not consider these questions with all seriousness? 
I have faith in your judgement. 

Once again I give you greetings on behalf. of all your brothers and 

sisters throughout the country: 

Rangali Bihur Oland Janalo. 

National and International Issues 

: This is the Government that works as per your election 
QUESTION 
plank. Can you give us some idea about how far you have gone in 
controlling the price situation and the restoration of law and order? 

PRIME MIN~STER : Law and order is not very good but we cannot 
change the mentality overnight. For three years, a situation existed where 
people felt that they could do what they liked. All the anti-social elements 
whom we had restrained-be they smugglers, blackmarketeers, hoarders 
or people who raised prices-were released suddenly. This is what created 

Excerpts from interview to the Tamil daily Makkal Kura/ of Madras, April 25, 1980 

the situation. 
position, there is a great deal of infiltration. 

In the Force also, the people, who should be rectifying the 

QUEST~ON : Infiltration means .... ? 

: On political or caste basis. So they don't think 
PRIME MINISTER 
of a job as a job. They say, 'so and so' is of 'such and such' caste. Now 
If 
we know, during last year, Ministers were 
somebody belonged either to their party or a particular caste, dependlng 
on the persons involved, they would say, "well, you release so and so and 
It had nothing to do with the merit of the case. The 
arrest so and so". 
whole atmosphere has deteriorated. 
that 
atmosphere. We are trying. So far as prices are concerned, you know, 
prices have never risen as at present. We ha\le not been able to bring them 
down appreciably but we have been able to hoid these on where they are. 

It is not easy to change 

interfering on that basis. 

QiJESTI~N : Madam, iast time in 1969, when you nationalized the banks, the . 
newspapers, which were always critical of you and your father, raised a 
hue and cry; politically also, there was much hue and cry about it. Political 
parties m.ade some noise. But this time, in 1980, it (nationalization of 
more banks) was rather a very unobtrusive step. Actually, it has gone 
unnoticed except in some editorials. How is 
it that there is a change 
in the climate and it is more receptive now to progressive reforms like this? 

PRIME MINISTER : Well, I think it is a continuation. And it hardly came 
up to me. 
I mean, the Finance Ministry regarded it as almost a routine 
because we have said that beyond a limit-Rs. 100 crore-there will be 
nationalization. These banks had gone well· beyond it. 

there 

: Well, Madam, 

is a most pressing problem that 
QUESTION 
is agitating the people. 
It is the Assam situation, because the whole 
It affects not only Assam but even a small man 
country is now paralysed. 
. in a village in some remote corner. The peculiarity with the Assam situation 
is that now the political initiative is not there; some non-political sections 
are conducting the agitation. 

PRIME MINISTER 
think they are very political-the people who 
are conducting. Political parties as such are not there. But obviously 
there are some people who are encouraging it from behind. They seem to 
be so emotional that they are not at all rational, because anything one says 
for their benefit is construed the other way. Now, I said 1971 would be a 
starting point. They are wanting these people to be deported. Therefore, 
if you start deporting them, it is something in their favour. Now they say, 
"Why do you say 1971? You withdraw that remark." Well, if you don't 

want to start at that, well, I withdraw that remark. But it was made with 
the hope of making a start. Simultaneously,. we will talk and come to a 
decision about the cut.off date, because the argument and the controversy 
was about cut-off date, not about starting date. So, let us start now. But 
they thought this is something else. 

QUESTION : 197l·basis was welcomed even by some political p~rties. 

PRIME MINISTER : All political parties earlier agreed. 
I think, may be, 
the Jan Sangh did not speak up, butt hey did not protest when we 
said this is the consensus. Later in Parliament, one Member, not Jan 
Sangh, but Janta party Member said : "We had no part in the consensus." 
But consensus does not mean that everybody agreed. It mea,nt everybody, 
minus say two, had agreed. Now they felt so strongly on 1971 that when 
the Governor suggested that we go back to 1967, all of them protested in 
the newspapers: ''She is.going behind your back, she has made some deal 
with the students." So, in that atmosphere, it is not pos~ible for me alone 
to come to any decision whatever it be. We have to discuss with the political 
partie;. We have to put it to Parliament. If another country is involved, 
then ~e have to talk to that country. 

QUESTION : Madam, they are not coming out with any alternative also. 

.No political party is suggesting anything at all. 
PRIME MINISTER 
There are some very anti·Indian posters and nasty slogans. Some of them 
have deplored this, but students and the main people have not even deplored 
or condemned these . 

QUESTION : Do you think this tendency would spread to other States also? 

PRIME MINISTER : I hope not. There is no reason for it. 

QUESTION : Because somehow or other this kind of chauvinistic or .... 

PRIME MIN~STER 
time of the Lok Dal. Such 
movements should be controlled in the beginning. When it was not 
controlled for some months, it became more and more difficult. 

: This started at the 

QUESTION : Everybody talks about unemployment problem. 
basic malady of this country? 

Is this the 

PRIME MINISTER : Well, every country has got unemployment. 

QUESTION : With this low rate of industrial growth .... 

.PR,ME MINISTER Well, no growth at all. We had reached minus 
at the time of the Janata and the Lok Dal. And they had very good 
conditions because they had good monsoon. We had left a very good 
legacy. Now they have left a bad legacy and we face severe drought. So, 
this is a period in which we are making efforts and, I think, we will get five 
percent growth which we now aim at. But it is not easy. 

QuEsT~ON : Some tangible steps you might take until they get employment. 
Of course, one view is that giving doles is not good. 

PRIME MINISTER : Well, doles we cannot even afford. 
It is not just 
a question of good or bad. And it does not create a good at1nosphere 
where doles are given. We had a programme-it was tried out in 
Maharashtra-work for cine in each family. Now we want to do that. 
But because of the drought, things have got a bit held up, because first thing 
is to give drinking wate1' .... 

QUESTION : This 12-point drought · relief scheme·. is. a positive and·. 
concrete step. At least you have been able 
to spell it out. ·• This 
has created a very good impression. Madam, there is some kind of 
fragmentation of political parties. What do you think are the causes of 
this or is it good for India, .because in a democracy at least two or three party 
system is always .... 

PRIME MINISTER : I don't think you can have a theory and try to 
fit the country into it. Obviously, there have to be two or more parties; 
but, the basic thing for the country is not whether you have got different 
parties or ·not, but whether it is going ahead or not. That is the main thing. 
If you have parties, can you just be very happy with them? If you have 
got democracy and you are not going ahead, the people will just kick 
democracy out of the way and adopt some other system. 

QUESTION : You must have read in 
of the intellectuals in Bombay. There, they have talked about. ... 

the newspapers about a meeting 

PRIME M~NISTER 

· Authoritarianism and so on. 

QUESTION : In one newspaper, some kind of very harsh expressions 
were also used. 

PR~ME MINISTER 
language. 

: In fact, they are known for their rather abusive 

QUESTION 

'Abusive 

language', you have used the correct word. 

They have interpreted that some efforts are being made to change the 
basic features of the Constitution. 

PRIME MINISTER : No efforts are being made, as far as· I know. They 
have been saying this before also, but nothing was done. 

QUESTION : Now, we have had the experience of your continuous period 
in office and also you have traumatic experience .... 

PRIME MINISTER : Not traumatic. 

QUEsT,oN : For us, people who admire you, it was an agonising experience 
from our point ofview. Now, after your return to power, we find that 
all kinds of people are trying to get into your Party. 

· PRIME MINISTER : That is true. 

\Vhat do you think we can <:lo about it? 

to streamline, . and set .. a11 . 

. You. are 

iri a position 

QUESTION 
example to other parties also, by adopting certain norms. about what kind 
of people should come in and who should not come. You have been very 
generous. You are not vindictive. 
I remember a passage. Winston 
Churchill had said about your father : 'This man knows neither hatred nor 
fear'. You are also generous in excusing people. The overall impact of 
this is that people's reaction is not so good. They are losing faith in the 
system itself, because one man is in the party today, tomorrow we do not 
know where he will be .. So, this is basically undermining the faith of the 
people in the political system. 

"PRIME MINISTER : Yes. We are having trouble because we took certain 
people but, generally, the local units do not want to accommodate them. 

QUESTION 
: Today, we have this development in Iran-the American 
rescue operation .... Now this is becoming a big issue. After this, it will 
further escalate. There is already a trade boycott . and others are trying 
to fill the vacuum. Do you envisage any pressure on India? 

PRIME MINISTER : What pressure can there be? 

QUESTION 
the EEC countries will fall in line. 

: They are organizing the trade boycott of Iran and most of 

Japan has already fallen in line. 

PRIME MINISTER : We are not in the EEC. 
I do not know how their 
sanctions will actually work. We do not approve of this business of having 
hostages. They are innocent people. But I do not know whether this_ is 
the tight way of tackling it, what they are now doing. 

QUESTION 
· How far have you succeeded in it? Of course, you have 
avoided the shooting war over the Afghanistan issue; very silent and quiet 
diplomacy has paid dividends. But after your meeting with the leaders in 
Salisbury, do you think this .situation will ease? 

PRIME MINISTER : Things have not moved much except that spotlight is 
on Iran. From that point of view, we have not succeeded 
in our main 
policy which was to try and prevent anybody from. having spheres of 
influence. Every country should be allowed to develop as it likes. 
If one 
bloc is increasing its influence, you cannot expect the others not to do so. 
You may not like it, b_ut it is only realistic to feel that they alone should not. 

QUESTION : There was a report that you were sending some special emissary 
to Moscow. 

PRIME MIN~STER : Well, people from Ministry. of Foreign Affairs are. 
always going to d_ifferent countries for different. purposes., · because in: the 
changing times, it is very . useful to keep much closer contact, which you 
cannot have nowadays through embassies. You could do so earlier, but now· 
everybody feels that unless some top person comes there .... 

QUESTION : Were you satisfied with the response of the Soviet Union, at 
least not hostile or positively good, to your efforts in Afghanistan'/ 

PRIME MINISTER : In what efforts? 

QUESTION : In regard to India's general attitude. 

: Our general attitude is to prevent fighting. 

PRIME MINISTER 
In that 
we have so far succeeded. We have also succeeded in convincing others of 
the reality of the situation. First, they were taking a very extreme line, 
now they have all softened down. 

QUESTION : You have had some talks with General Zia of Pakistan. 
Now, do you think our relations will improve? 

PRIME MINISTER 
: Well, we shall continue to make efforts. But on their 
side, as you know, they raised the Kashmir issue in the Islamic summit, not 
only in Islamabad, but also in the smaller summit that was held in London. 
And they have been distributing to people in Salisbury maps or rather books 
on Pakistan, which contained the maps in which they have shown the whole 
of Kashmir as well as Junagadh as part of Pakistan. 

QUESTION : Did you point this out? 

DEMOCRACY AND NAT~ONAL STRENGTH 

: I did not see it there. 

PRIME M~NISTER 
I only saw what they gave. 
My family looked at the book and they saw it immediately. I had the sort 
of day when I could not wash my face. 
I had one visitor after another. In 
fact, it was yery late at night And we were due to leave early in the 
morning. 

QUEST!ON : Whatever others may say, it was you who took the initiative 
for normalising the relations with China. 

PRIME MINISTER : Others cannot say anything. If they say, they are saying 
untruth, because the facts are there. 

QUESTION 
the previous government ... 

: But they made a big show of their doing something which 

. PRIME M~NISTER : What they worked, for instance ... 

QUESTION : They visited so often: 

PRIME MJN~STER : Is that relationship visiting? I do not think if we had 
said to Chinese that we wanted to send somebody, they would have said 'no.' 

QUEST~ON : : There were two kinds of visitors-one sent officially by 
the Government and the others invited by the Chinese Government; and 
at the two levels, talks were going on there. And when our Minister was 
there, aggression took place in Vietnam. 

PRIME MINISTER 
: Not only that, the situation did not improve in any 
way, I mean, during their regime. They started to reactivate Kashmir, and 
the sort of agreements which they have made, for instance, in Bangladesh. 
None of these agreements is in our interest. Apart from that, they have 
been drawn up in such a way thatnobody got that. In an agreement, you 
have to look at every comma, how it will be interpreted legally and so on 
It seems that it was a very slipshod work. Nobody in the 
and so forth. 
Ministry is now taking responsibility. They say, "No, no, we 
told them 
that this was not the way". 

: Very strange. Madam, now I can come to my region. 

QUESTION 
It 
was in 1967, during Kamaraj's period, that the Congress party lost its sphere 
of influence in the State (Tamil Nadu). Now, for the first time we could see 
in this election-the Lok Sabha election-that, from Kashmir to Kanya-
kuinari, a spirit of nationalism prevailed. That is how we look at it, the 
significance of your victory. 
It was a national -perspective and a national 
action, that has brought about this. Could you not take advantage of this, 

instead of again compromising with one or the other of these regional 
parties? 

PRIME M~NISTER 
: We did make certain agreements, and I don't think 
we can go back on agreements. Our efforts should be to persuade them also 
to look at things from the larger point of view. 

QUESTION 
: Do you hope to succeed in that because considering the past, 
I personally do not-I was an eye-witness to what happened to you in 
Madurai. 
It is something emotional and sentimental for us; we are not 
able to reconcile ourselves to that. Of course, politically you can take 
decision, that is your right, but do you think that there. can be a change now? 

PR~ME MINISTER 
basic matters. 

We have to try for it, but you cannot give up on 

QUESTION .. : You are very generous, Madam. Our readers want to know 
what sustained you during 1977~80. Sliri Yun.us in his book says that ari · 
A1nerican couple was visiting you and there was a big crowd. They asked 
you : "Have you done anything for these people?" You are reported to 
have said : "I have not done anything for them. And for those for whom 
I have done something, they are nowhere to be seen." That was a sense of 
isolation. Did you feel at any time that kind of despondency? 

PRIME MINISTER : I did not feel despondent. But it was very obvious. 
In the beginning, the atmosphere was such that my own Party was telling 
me not to go out. Nobody was visiting us. Ahd if anybody came, he came 
pretending to be son1ebody else, not actually in disguise in that sort of way. 
They were greatly harassed by the police, even by the police in my house. 

QUESTION : I myself had the experience. 

PRIME MINISTER : Then the driver would be asked, "You find out what 
your boss said inside. Why has he come? Whom else did he meet?" 
and so on and so forth. 
I have said even when ambassadors came, they 
did not dare come in their own cars, though they were independent people. 
In my time, they always met Members of the Opposition, JP and all. We 
never said : "These people are against us, don't meet them." 

QuEST~ON : But why could they not stop the masses? 

PRIME MINISTER 
it was a great 
relief to me. I thought I wouldbe able t_q go and live in the hills and do some 
other things. Now, once I was deprived of that, I was upset that I was 

: When I was defeated, as I have said, 

DEMOCRACY AND NATiONAL STRENGTH 

neither here nor there. 
I could not do what I wanted and was just stuck in: 
Delhi. But that passed quite quickly, because it was in 1977 itself that large 
crowds started coming and I started going out. Then I was travelling all 
the time continuously. 

QUESTION : Who broke the ice, Madam, the poorer sections or these? 

I went there much later. 

: The very first people came to me even. before I had 
PRIME MINISTER 
I think the first lot of people were tribals 
left the Prime Minister's House. 
from Orissa because their land had been taken away, and they came to 
In fact, there is a tribal society 
complain. Then tribals from Gujarat. 
there. I forget the name, non-political, they also came. They invited me and 
said, "We want you to immediately come to a big function there". 
thought it was not right for me to go. 
I went 
there after my release from prison. 
It happened to be just a day after I 
was released. The second thing I did was, I think, I went either to Vinoba 
Bhave or to Hardwar, I don't know which. · But I had written to him that 
I would. go and see him in DeceiJiber.1979. Because of elections, we put it off .. 
He said, "You did not have the time then, now you have time, so you better 
come". It was absolutely a private visit. We did not inform anybody. · I 
think we had planned to go on a l\1onday. On Friday night the local MP 
came to me and said : "You are going to my area and I have to be there. 
And President's swearing-in is on Monday. So, if we go on Monday, they 
will say we are being petty-minded and not attending the President's 
swearing-in ceremony. So, you must change the date". I said: "We don't 
want you people to be present, but you have made a big fuss". So, we 
changed. On Saturday morning, it .was decided that I would go on Sunday 
and yet there was a very big crowd at Nagpur airport which is fifteen miles 
away from the city. And then, of course, every day at the Ashram we had 
people. They were coming even from Andhra Pradesh. So, that was one 
big visit. And then I was invited by the Trade Union at BHEL. They 
had started some big projects. 
It takes four hours by car to reach Hardwar, 
but it took me ten and a half hours to meet their request; passing through 
. the cities especially was almost impossible. And it was only because I got 
off the car, elbowed my way, and so on, that we could get there in ten hours. 
People's response, specially of the young people, had a very protective sort 
of feeling. At that time nothing like Madurai had happened, but they knew 
I was not getting police protection. So, they said : "We want you to go 
exactly as the Prime Minister". And I had motor-cycle riders on the sides 
and front. 

QUEST~ON 
religious in the last three years? 

: Some of us have the impression that you have become very 

PRIME MINISTER : No, I haven't. 
I am not more religious than I was 
before. But it started with Karnataka. Devrajji said : "I have made a 

promise that I will bring you to that temple, therefore you have to." And 
once you start going, you cannot say 'no'. It becomes so difficult. They 
say, this as well is important, this is very important. 

QUEST~ON : Madam, did you enjoy peace? 

PRIME MiNISTBR 
: I do not think you got peace. People have such faith 
and that is very interesting. It .means a great deal to them if I go, I mean, 
they feel I am closer to them, if I go. 

QUESTION 
your greatest admirers. They stood by you. 

: What will you like to tell our readers, Madam? They are 

PRIME MINISTER 
which I am deeply grateful and I hope they will continue to do s~. 

: Tamil Nadu has stood by me and supported me for 

QUESTJ;ON : Something special, Madam? 

PRIMB MIN~STER : Well, Tamil Naciu played a very important part in 
India's freedom as well as India's development and it has, specially in our 
government, given great leadership. As you know, at one time, perhaps 
even now, the percentage of people from the South is quite high in the 
administration, amongst our scientists and almost in all spheres of activity; 
this is why it is important that they continue to look at problems from the 
broader, all-India perspective and in the longer perspective also. Narrow-
mindedness may get you somewhere in the near future, but not ultimately. 
We must all consider ourselves Indian citizens. I think we must also 
consider ourselves world citizens; but only when you have a feeling of 
nationalism, can you be a true internationalist. And in any newspaper or 
periodical, the basic responsibilfty is to give a correc;t view of what is 
happening, not what they imagine. Even though many of the Indian people 
who have been expressing their views so openly, even though they have never 
been true, right in their assessments, they continue to give the same type of 
assessment. 

: This has nothing to do with the paper. 

QUESTION 
I happened to be 
the President of the Indian Federation of Working Journalists. There is a 
feeling among my colleagues that you are not well disposed 
towards the 
Press in Delhi, and you are not even meeting them. Have you any special 
reason for it? 

PRIME MINISTER : I have been very busy, and they have always twisted 
(what I said). During these three years also, journalists and reporters met 
me at every airport and they themselves said that they would report what I 

had said, but were not sure whether it would be printed; and it was not 
printed. 

QUESTION : Correct, Madam. Freedom of the press here is freedom of the 
proprietors. You can do a lot, but you are not doing, that is also my 
grievance against you. 

PRIME MINISTER : What do you think I can do? 

QUESTION : You must delink the newspapers from business houses. 

PRIME MINISTER : It is easier said than done.. . It is a vicious circle. Some 
of the people who are at the top-writers for the press-they have their own 
kind of groups. So, each promotes the other. Everybody thinks these are the 
only intellectuals in the country and they are given opportunities and so on. 

India's Problems in World Setting 

QUESTION : I can just go through certain issues of domestic nature first, 
and then on to foreign later. 
I would like to start with the situation 
in Assam because it is very difficult to get an accurate image from the Press 
as to what exactly is going on. 
I would like your assessment of the situation 
and what the government's policy is. 

PRIME MI~STER : Well, there is an agitation there against the so-c!tlled 
foreigners. Ostensibly, they say it is against those people who have come 
into India from Bangladesh or from Nepal. But, in actual fact, it is working 
against some Indian citizens who have come from other States as well as 
citizens of Assam who are completely Assamese-who have lived in Assam 
for generations. It is one of those chauvinistic things that come up every 
now and then. 

India is a developing country and development has been rather uneven. 
It is obvious that where there is industry, it is much easier for that area to 
grow and for people to get more jobs. We have a programme for developing 
backward areas and we have made progress in it, but nevertheless we don't 
reach all places, and business people don't like putting up an industry which 
is going to cost them more either by way of transport of something or the 
other. 

- interview with Daniel Sneider of the New Salisbury International Press Service, 
June 5, 1980 

Certain areas have remained backward, benefited 

less from our 
advances, and Assam is one of them. But it is not the only one. Eastern 
Uttar Pradesh is in the same situation. Large parts of Orissa are so, 
In fact, I would say that perhaps it is 
perhaps even more so than Assam. 
worse than Assam, and almost every State has an area which is not deve-
loped. That's why we have made a list of backward areas and backward 
districts. 

Now, we have this problem of people coming in from both sides of 
Paldstan. Whereas the rush from West Pakistan was a torrent or a flood in 
one spate, from the east, it has been a more gradual process. Many of them 
were being persecuted there; we had accepted them and we were accepting 
them until perhaps it was 1960-61 when the Government of India did take a 
step and said we have to do something about these people. 

Tribunals were set up to see that people were sent back after that date. 
When Bangladesh came into existence, we had no formal agreement, :but we 
more or less. agreed, not at iny level, but aJ the junior minister's level, that 
those, who have come, b9.ve come; but from now on we have to be very strict. . 
However, some of the people who had been deported have come back 
because the border is not the sort of border you can totally seal off. 

Now, why has this movement come up at the time it did? This is rather 
curious, and also the manner in which it started. Because the problem was 
It was the Assamese themselves who were 
there, everyone knew about it. 
not terribly keen at that moment on implementing the earlier accord and 
the Central Government was reininding them about this problem. They 
did not bother about it in the party elections, in the parliamentary elections 
in 1977; they did not bother about it in the assembly elections in 1978. 
It 
· was when the Janata Government fell in Assam, a part of the Janata broke 
off and called itself the Assam Janata. That is 
the mf)ment when this 
movement started. Now, the Assam Janata people feel Hi.at it were those, 
who have gone out and whdse Government had been defeated, who started 
It is not possible to say 
this movement thinking it might help them out. 
whether this is true or not but this is the report; because the agitation was 
on for some-time before our Government came, a minimum of six months 
or so. This was the report we got when we came in. By that time it had 
already spread. This sort of thing, if you deal with it in the beginning, it is 
much easier. Once it spreads, it becomes more and more difficult. 

Now, why it has popular support is that the feeling is being spread 
among the people that if you throw out all these people, you will get more 
land, you will get more jobs. This is not going to work out that way; but 
it is something tha{ can arouse people's feelings, and may make them feel 
involved. 

I have always dealt with all such things sympathetically, because I know 
that although some demands are unreasonable, there always can be genuine 
grievances. We are prepared to deal with the genuine grievances which is 

one of economic development, the question of employment which they share 
with whole of India, in fact, with almost the whole of the Third World, I 
would say. Nevertheless, something special has to be done for the 
north-east areas. 

These areas do not have very good communications and are difficult 
It is a longer process than it would be 
even when you start development. 
on the plains. So, on that part of it we took action immediately. We set 
up a Committee of Ministers. This does not n1ean putting off something as 
some people think that you name a committee, you put the problem off. 
Our experience was that Jammu and Kashmir had raised the same problem 
of things not being passed quickly by the Centre. During my previous 
regime, we had set up a small conunittee and any economic issue that came 
up, all the people met immediately and took a decision on the spot, and they 
were very happy with this. 
\Vhen I came back to power, the first thing they 
said to me is: "Look, this was not done in Jana ta time. Can we revive this?" 
So, we thought we would do a sirnil~r thJng in Assam. Instead of decision-
making going from file to file, office to office, everyoody meets and either . 
they say yes or .no, but it is definite. Of course, there are proposals for 
specific projects which we are also looking into. 

Now, with regard to the so-called foreigners. We want to make a clear 
distinction that those who have come after 1971, there is no doubt they 
must all go. There is no controversy about this with any political party or 
the Bangladesh Government. The controversy starts about the others. 
The proposal made to the agitators was that let us start this work. At the 
moment nothing is being done. The tribunals are inactive; the local staff 
is not worldng. So, we wanted to start. While this process is going on, 
we shall meet simultaneously and try to \J.nderstand (a) the size of the 
problem and (b) the human aspect. 

In theory, you can say that if somebody is born in India, he is an Indian 
citizen. But•suppose you have old parents who are not born in India, 
what are you going to do? Where are you going to push them out? Vve 
can't deal with them as statistics. ·-we have to say that these are men, women 
and children, and we don'twant to keep a burden on Assam. But first we 
must know the numbers, and we must know the type of problem. Then 
we must sit together and find a humane settlement so that nobody is 
harassed. I asked them clearly, "Do you want me to shoot these people?" 
Of course they said no, no. Then I said, "Well, where do they go?" 
I'm not saying that they shouldn't go anywhere, but it is something that has 
to be worked out. 
I can't just say I'm going to push them into Bangladesh. 
So, on these matters they (the students) have been really very unreasonable. 
They say, "No, you agree to this first, then we will see." 

What happens when you agree to anything is that m.ost of the political 
parties want to keep 1971 as the (cut-off) date. I have only taken 1971 as 
a starting point, not as a cut-off point. Then somebody started talking about 

1967, and immediately the West Bengal Government and others said, "Oh, 
she's doing something behind our backs. She promised she wouldn't move 
from 1971'\ So, it is extremely complicated from that angle, but it's not 
an insoluble problem. 

QUESTION : What about the question of foreign involvement? 

PRIME MINISTER .: Well, I was just coming to that. As I said, it is the 
general public who is involved, it is this kind of economic issue. And of 
course they have done a lot of propaganda that these people staying there 
means that Assamese culture is going to get drowned, which is not true. 
In 
fact, the people who are coming are becoming absorbed. They are speaking 
Assamese, they are not speaking their languages. 
In fact, in our census we 
see that th.e number of Assamese-speaking people should have gone down 
but it hasn't. .· It has increased. So, far from slowing it, it has helped it 
blossom.. · Every other country" does want new talent. 
. Now, while the bulk of students. also are sincere, perhaps they have been . 
affected by what is happening in other countries and they feel that they · 
should take the lead. From time to time they make a statement like 
"political parties are irrelevant". Even in the last few days, they were very 
angry that I met the political parties to consult 
the Assam 
situation). So, that attitude is there. However, there are some other 
people .... Who is guiding those people and who is motivating them, we do not 
know. But every time the students themselves have agreed to something, 
they have gone back and one hour later have said, "We are sorry". They 
have made a suggestion to which we have agreed and then they have gone 
back on it. So, this is what £ives the feeling that there is something behind 
them. 

them ( on 

Also, they seem to have large funds. 

In the beginning, son1e local 
people were giving funds, but they tell us they have not taken any money 
from them for many months. Th~re is certain other circumstantial evidence 
and also previous experience. 

In Assam; during· British times, there was no educa-

There is also certain amount of rivalry there between groups. Now 
there are some elements who would like to introduce communal overtones. 
Some of them say it is the pure Assamese versus the rest and not specifically 
against the Bengalis. 
tion and only a few Assamese could go to Calcutta University; they were the 
ones who got educated. Almost all the officials were Bengalis. So; that 
feeling is also there. But now gradually the Assamese are taking over from 
them. But most of our civil service cadres are rather mixed. There may 
be South Indian officials and, we think, that is a good thing for national 
integration. 

QUESTION 

In terms of the communal element, I see in the Press here 

DEMOCRACY AND NATIONAL STRENGTH

some questions about the role of the RSS in particular, in terms of giving it 
a Hindu-Muslim theme. 

PRIME MINISTER : The RSS has been there as everybody els~. You see, 
It may be exceedingly small but there are 
there is an anti-national element. 
some people who bring out anti-India posters and so on. Now, my grouse 
is that these people who are supporting the agitation-I am not 
accusing them of being anti-national-why don't they condemn that aspect 
of it and those who are doing these things? 

The RSS has been encouraging the agitation without providing a 
. solution and, of course, even earlier their solution to it always was to have 
an exchange of population religion-wise or something like that which would 
be fatal to the unity and strength of the country. 

QUESTION : You have pointed out that this thing has accelerated somewhat 
in t]),e period since yout Government came to power. Is there anything 
. which suggests a pattern of destabilization which perhaps may be similar to 
previous efforts that have been made in the earlier parts of this decade? 

PRIME MINISTER : Those who are against us, they continue to be very 
virulently hostile. Now, it is one thing to be hostile in your speech or 
something, but it's another matter when you go beyond that. 
I don't know 
whether you have read the statement of the leader of one of the political 
parties when we _won these elections. Now, it has been a pretty close fight. 
Some of our people have lost by only a couple of hundred votes and some of 
their people have won by that margin. Now, the contrast is that when they 
won, we did not say a word about rigging although the victory was so 
sweeping that.it was not really believable. 
In some places it was almost 
It is 
as though moi:e people had voted than existed and things like that. 
hard to imagine that in one place everybody would vote for 
the same 
candidate and the other candidate would not get aliy vote. Anyway, 
this gentleman has said that now Parliament is irrelevant. Now, you see 
the sort of attitude : while they're winning, the system is alright; but as soon 
as they don't win, they start blaming the system. 

QUESTION : But also in term of the foreign opposition, that also was in 
my mind. 

PRIME MINISTER : The foreign opposition is very difficult to say, but I 
don't know if they have reconciled themselves to the changes here. Now, · 
certainly most of the foreign Press is not, and they continue their hostility. 
And also, some of the governments encourage elements who are so hostile. 
One is the political hostility. You say we disapprove of the policy and you 
put the facts. That is fair enough. But it seems that some of them 

encourage people who are very viciously against us without anything to back 
up what they are saying, and their statements are given tremendous 
publicity whereas no reply is allowed. 

this 
QUESTION : Let me take off from this Press question. 
copy of Newsweek. 
I don't know if you have seen this cover (June 9th 
'China's Military Lift Off'). This is the objective coverage of Newsweek 
but the implication both here and elsewhere is that linkage is being made 
between the Chinese new military relationship with the US and the recent 
Inda-Soviet arms deal. 

I brought 

PRIME MINISTER : Our deal is not recent. I mean this talk was going on 
long before, even during the Janata time, because you know these things 
are not decided in a couple of months. Vie have finalised something that 
was on the anvil for quite a while and I think most of it was done when 
Mr Kosygin visited here in 1978. 

: I am aware of that fact. What is your view on the Chinese 

QUESTION 
role, the way the Chinese are viewing their role in Asia, and in the relation-
ship with the US? 

PRIME MINISTER 
: The Chinese want to strengthen themselves in every 
possible way. Now, if they can use the United States for this, they will use 
it. · They are using it. The US thought it could use China against the 
Soviet Union and they did, but it was counter-productive in the sense that 
this is what has started the other reaction because the Soviet Union is very 
11?-uch concerned about what they consider a new movement to surround 
t}!em. And, I think, sometime or other, the Chinese and the Soviet Union 
may n1ake up. None of these things are permanent. We don't like any-
body encouraging anybody. 

QUESTION : You have been speaking a lot in your campaign address-
I noticed even in your campaign in Assembly elections-about the threat of 
world war and the possibility of the renewed cold war turning into a nuclear 
confrontation. What is your view on the importance of detente, East-West 
detente for the developing sector? 

PRIME MINISTER : Well, it is very important for us because we think that 
war is disastrous for anybody but more so for countries like India which 
desperately need peace to conduct our economies. What I was saying is 
not that war is likely, but that our effort is to see that it is avoided. 

QUESTION : -When President Giscard d'Estaing was here in January there 
was a sense communicated, both in verbal statements and in subsequent 

DEMOCRACY AND NAT~ONAL STRENGIB 

events, of a common understanding between France in Europe and 
India in the developing sector, of playing a role, perhaps even a role together, 
to preserve this kind of peace and preserve conditions for development in 
I am wondering how you visualize India's role now and how 
the world. 
you see the European role in this period, particularly after the last few weeks. 
The Europeans, I think, have taken some very clear steps to preserve peace 
at least in Europe. 

PRIME MINISTER : Well, I think they also see that war is not in their 
interest. Each is worried about his own economy, how the international 
situation is going to affect their markets, their dealings with other countries. 

QuEsT,oN : In terms of India's policy at this time, is there some sort of 
coordination, at least checking back and forth, as far as the initiatives that 
are being made from the European side on the Middle East? 

. PRIME M~NISTER : It is more a question of keeping .in touch; We agreed 
In Salisbury and Belgrade I 
. with the French that we would keep in touch. 
met a large number of people practically night and day .... While they were 
concerned about Afghanistan and Iran, they were also worried about their 
own countries, their economic difficulties, prices and also the North-South 
situation. 

QUESTION : Is there a link in your mind on the necessity of modernization 
in the developing sector and the preservation of peace? How do you view 
that question? 

PRIME M~NISTER : There is of course a link. 

QUEST~ON : As far as India is concerned, as far as the developing sector is 
concerned, how do you actually create the circumstances whereby large 
scale development can take place? 

PRIME MINISTER : There should be peace and stability within the country 
and so on. Today's world is such that if there is a conflict anywhere, the 
waves are bound to touch most other countries. 
in India, are in a 
specially delicate position because, in some ways, we are among the poorest 
countries and yet we are also developed; so we get the worst of both worlds 
instead of getting the best. Take oil prices. 
In the more affluent countries, 
you can complain about, but you can pay finally; whatever the price is. We 
are not in a position to pay. Now, the developing countries-most of them-
also cannot pay but their needs are very much smaller than ours. Now, it 

_ is not such a large problem for them. For us it is a very big problem.- Now, -· 

our farmers are using large quantities of fertilizers and diesel for pump sets. 

They are average farmers, not just the big farmers. We are not wasting it, 
(oil) but it is just the size of the country and the size of the population that 
creates a huge demand. 

QUEST~ON : Now, you have just completed the Assembly elections and the 
Parliament opens shortly. What are the priorities of the Government 
particularly in terms of economy? 

to get the economy going. There has been 
PRIME MINISTER : First, 
stagnation. We have to encourage investment to increase production. 
We have to build up the distribution system for essential commodities, and 
one of the biggest bottlenecks is transport. We simply could not get coal 
to the factories, sugar to the market and things like that. Railways have 
improved but still there is a gap. 

Secondly, we have to take up again the special programmes for the 
poorest and weaker sections, 
'.Becau:ie what happens in development is 
that-we are b1amed for it but it is a natural iaw, there is nothing "we can 
do-whatever programme you have, it is the better off people who benefit 
from it. If you have more technology, it is those who can use that techno· 
logy who are going to become richer. Now, if we deny it to them, we are 
in a way cutting off our nose to spite our face. So, we have to balance it 
by doing something for the others. Although the benefit does seep through 
as we have seen in Punjab, that is, with the improvement of agriculture the 
rich farmers got richer but so did the middle farmers and so did the smaller 
farmers and, finally, the labourer, their daily wage went up as well. So, it 
does percolate down. 

And as I said, it is such a large country, there are large areas we just 
cannot ignore them. So, we have these programmes. Take land reform, 
where we give land to the landless. Then in our 20-Point Programme we 
also have building° of small houses for the homeless, and various things like 
that. If anything is lacking we take up new programmes to provide it. 
On employment we have certain program.mes, but at best they are patchwork 
because employment can only come with greater development. There is 
a constant quarrel going on . 

. On this again, the Government 

immediately before mine felt that 
because we were encouraging industry, we were neglecting the farmers. 
This is not at all true because most of our industry is based on agriculture 
or for the benefit of agriculture. 
In a place like Punjab, bringing in 
machinery there has not led to unemployment. On the contrary, it has led 
to shortage of labour. 

The election has cut across casteism in many places; but in this interim 
period, when we were not in power, casteism grew very largely ... It was 
always there but it had not played such an important part in politics. 

So, there is a general lack of will, lack of thrust with everybody working 
together. Now, a lot of people who come from abroad say that people here 
have been apathetic compared to what they see in Germany. So, we have 
been able to build up that atmosphere. A year just before my defeat, 
people felt they were involved with India and everybody felt that it was their 
future and it was not something in the air. So, we have to bring back that 
kind of feeling. 

QUEST~ON 
parts of the country, there is an atmosphere of expectation. 

: Since I have been here and talking to people in different 

PRIME M~NISTER : Yes, you know it is the usual expectation that somebody 
has come and something is going to happen from above, which simply 
cannot happen. At the most you can give a direction, you can give 
encouragement, but what has to be done has to be done all along the line. 
If agricultural production in my time has doubled, I did not go and dig the 
fields but we gave a programme .. · The farmers accepted it and it yielded 
. results. So, all we can do is to try and help to the. best of our ability, hut 
. they . have to have that feeling that they must take advantage of the 
programmes that are made foi' their benefit, 

Role of Youth 

YOUTH FORCE IS an important force at any time in any country, but 
specially in our country where there has been a certain d~endence-on age, 
a certain dependence on authority, a certain desire to lean on somebody. It 
is all the more important for us if the country has to move on to the 21st 
It is a century that is going to be vastly 
century. We are on its threshold. 
different from anything which we have known before. 

People of my age group, or even those who are somewhat younger, can 
It is only the youth of this 
have no conception of what the future will be. 
country and of other countries who can forge a new path into that future ... 
The task is not easy, not only because the whole trend in the country-let 
us face the facts-is anti-youth. It is against youth not because of their 
youth but because of distrust of anything that is new. There is a desire to 
cling to what is familiar, not realizing that the very urge to move away from 
the familiar leads to knowledge .... Whenever anybody goes ahead and does 
anything which is new, those who do not have the strength themselves to go 
. ahead, resent this movement. This is a fact of life. 

From a speech at a youth convention, New Delhi, July 9, 1980 

We are between two worlds .. Large parts of the country are under-

developed, but we have pockets of highly sophisticated development. And 
balancing between these two is very difficult. Similarly, the path we have 
chosen is not the old path, although not entirely a new path. It is 
specifically an Indian path. We want to take what is good in India's 
traditions, in India's culture, in India's old experience, but we also want to 
take advantage of anything that has happened in the world which can help 
us to better the lives of our people, to create a stronger nation and to forge 
ahead into the future. 

Today the capitalist world and the communist world are both aiming 
at the same thing. 
India is not aiming at that kind of life. We are trying 
to have an entirely different pattern. Whether we shall succeed, I do not 
know. But at least that is our effort and that is part of the reason why 
there is so much misunderstanding about us in both the blocs. We have 
embarked on our industrialization at a period which is much more difficult 
· than what the advanced countries of the world faced when they industrialized 
l do· not have to remind you that when the. 'vVest began to 
themselves. 
industrialize, there wa.s · no democracy. There was limited democracy in 
England, but there was no adult franchise as we have now. There were no 
labour laws, there was nothing to protect the worker. Therefore, the people 
who set up industries exploited not only us, who were in their colonies, but 
their own people, their own women, their own children. Those who have 
read the literature of that time would know how l'>mall children were sent 
down into the mines, because th.ere was no space .for adults to go. They 
never saw sunshine. Many of them became blind at an early age, many of 
them died very prematurely. But there was no voice of complaint. 
It 
came at a later stage; and, when this demand of rights grew, it came with 
education. Education itself spread not becaus.e people. wanted to be 
educated, but because machinery was becmning suphisticated and illiterate 
workers could not manage them. Education was taken up because it was 
needed to run the better machlnes. With education it was obvious that new 
ideas, new thoughts, new desires and new ambitions would arise. By that 
time these Western nations had the resources to meet the demands of the 
workers. Thus, their political 
industrial 
revolution. But in our country, we have started the other way. We started 
with the political revolution, with demands for rights, rather than with the 
concept of work and responsibility. The demands are getting higher and 
higher ... This creates great economic difficulties for us .... 

revolution came after 

the 

Without discipline nothing at all can be achieved. Take a river. 
Rivers are very important for the life of a country. But what is a river? 
It is not just water. 
It is water which flows within two banks. Once it 
gets out of the banks, it creates havoc. While it is within the discipline of 
the two banks, it is a force which can be used for all 
types of beneficial 
purposes. This is what we mean when we say th.at we should harness or 

channel the youth force of the country, to build this country into the 
country of the dreams which through the ages great Indians and small 
Indians have had. There bas been a dream of what India should be. There 
are always forces which work against that, forces which divert the national 
energies, either through selfishness, greed, outside influences or some other 
reason. But by and large, the Indian people do dream of a great India. 
And a great India can only come about if the youth energy is harnessed 
to creative and constructive work, if people understand the necessities of 
the times and of the nation, and, if together all are prepared to face dangers 
and difficulties. Nothing worthwhile in life has ever been achieved without 
difficulties and without being hurt. 
It is the hurts which strengthen a person 
or a nation. And even in countries where there is no challenge, people go 
out to seek them. Why do people come all the way here to climb Mount 
Everest or go up the Ganga on small boats? · Because, there is no challenge 
· in their countries and they wa.nt to face physical challenges. Here you have 
physical challenges, mental challenges, moral challenges, 
intellectual 
· challenges. . There is rio shortage of challenges. V,/ e have to meet them and . · 
the more we are willing to meet them, the greater will be our strength to 
conquer those challenges and to n1ake a mark on life ... No country has 
ieveloped without hardship. Today, America is the richest country 1n the 
world, but if you look at their history you wiil see what the pioneers went 
through, how they worked with their fingers because they had no tools. 
It 
is because the pioneers went through those difficulties that that nation 
became affiuent and rich, even though today they seem to be incapable of 
using their power and their wealth, leave alone for solving the world's 
problems, even to solve their own. That is another matter, but they built 
up the country into something that is great. 

I was for four years on the Executive Council of UNESCO, the world 
organization for education; science and culture. Time and again other 
people have told me : "Mrs Gandhi, your people, man to man, are the best 
of any around here. But somehow when you sit together you seem to get 
weakened. Others who are much poorer in individual capability, become 
strong as a team". 
I am just telling you something from my experience. 
Each person has to learn these things for himself or herself. But other's 
experience helps in trying to get us to think about these things and to take 
the initiative in forging a new path. 
India- today badly needs new directions 
to pull us out of the rut into which we have got. .. It is your task to make that 

India and 

You have this opportunity of being the pioneers. 

It is an opportunity. 
It is also a hardship and a danger. But I have tremendous faith in 
the 
, people of 
the young people. And_ I 
might tell you, wherever our people have had 
the opportunity· of 
training; of education, or have gone abroad to do things, they are second to 
none. Where do we fail? We fail in team-spirit. We fail because we do not 
have the stamina. 

especially 

in 

major effort to get us out of the rut, on to new roads and new paths, so that 
once more people can go on to high endeavour and significant achievement. 

The Indian Scene 

QUESTION : I think that one continuing interest since Independence is in 
the whole concept of democratic socialism. Now, you have said many 
times-and your father has also pointed it out-that, in India, socialism 
· has not meant a doctrinaire or scientific dogma, but it is an attempt to give 
economic content.... 

PRIME MINISrER : I would not say itis unscientific. 

. QuEST~ON : What would you say? 

PRIME MINISTER : It is not dogmatic or doctrinaire. 

QUESTION : I understood it as an attempt to give s01ne economic content to 
democracy and also to carry out social transformation in a gradual, peaceful 
I think your father and yourself have used similar language. I 
wonder if you could discuss the ways in which you may have modified his 
thinking on either the goals or means. You have had the opportunity to 
observe his experien?es, his successes, his theories, so that when you came 
to power, I wonder if you had thought either of using different methods to 
achieve the same goals or perhaps even in redefining the goals them-
selves. 

PRIME MINISTER : No, the goals are exactly the same. 

QUESTION : How would you express the goals? 

PRIME MlNISTER ; The basic goal is to lessen the poverty of India and its 
economic backwardness and to make freedom real, which means working 
towards self-reliance in the economy, so that we are not pressurised by others 
or dependent on them in times of shortage or difficulty. 

I don't think that we have made any deviation from methods either. 
But what happens is not a question of where he succeeded or failed. We 

Interview with Dr. (Ms) Francine R. Frankel, U.S. Political Scientist, New Delhi, 
July 26, 1980 

DEMOCRACY AND NAT~ONAL STRENGTH 

faced entirely different situations. He may well have taken the same kind 
of attitudes which I have taken, because while a person is living, .. he 
is 
changing and he is meeting the challenges which are thrown up by either 
events beyond control or even those which are controllable to some extent. 
The world today is very different from the world in which he lived. 
In 
India, it is different because after we became free, he was the undisputed 
leader, although there was a lot of opposition, there was a lot of carping and 
there was no shortage of difficulties. Nevertheless, he was the leader and 
people within the party did not think of going against him. Whereas, when 
I came in, there was a constant fight within the country and elements had 
gathered strength. This had happened in his lifetime towards the end of 
his life, where already people were not averse to using any means at all; if 
they thought they would gain something politically, which was very 
unfortunate because it did hamper our progress. 

QUESTION : On this question of political means, Gandhiji stressed purity of 
means: . As I understood your father, 11-lthough he felt he had. deviated froin .. 
Gandhi's social goals, he kept faith with him on the principles of means and 
ends. You have also said that on many occasions. At the same time you 
have not hesitated to take action against opponents which your enemies 
call ... when they themselves had acted outside the framework of Constitution, 
whether it was the Marxists in West Bengal, or whether it was the JP 
Movement. 

PRIME MINISTER : The question is : Had Gandhiji seen a threat to India, 
It is not a personal thing. For instance, 
how would he have reacted? 
although he was so strongly wedded to non-violence, when Kashmir was 
3ttacked ip. 1947, he did support our action of giving military defence. 
am not equating myself by any means to Gandhiji, but one just does not 
know, in a given situation how Gandhiji \y'Ould have acted. I don't think 
he would have tolerated half as much as I tolerated. He was very strict 
with his followers in regard to what they should do and what they should 
not do. 

QUESTION : In the cases that I mentioned, do you think there was a 
threat to India? 

PRIME MINISTER : Yes, there was a threat to India in the sense that if there 
is general chaos at a time of grave economic difficulty ... Although he is now 
denying it, Mr. George Fernandes is on record in having said that he per-
sonally was responsible for so many derailments in one State alone, about 
63 or so, in Karnataka; and the Railway strike was not undertaken from the 
point of view of the workers' demands. 
ment would come to a stop. 

It was called so that the Govern-

QUESTION : Would you say that in Indian conditions, different political 
methods are necessary than in the case in 1950s or early 60s? 

PRIME MINISTER : Well, it is not just Indian conditions, but it is world 
conditions. You see what is happening in the United States. This did not 
happen in the 50s: the sort of crime, the violence, the attitude of young 
people, the going away from old values. Initially we thought that there was 
greater idealism, but I do not think that anybody thinks so now. India is 
not isolated. It is part of a world phenomenon. We are influenced by what 
happens outside and it is aggravated here or takes different shapes because 
of our own existing older problems or the new ones which development 
throws up. Many of our modern problems are those of development. 

QUESTION : May I pursue this line of your own experience being different ... 
Accounting for any difference one may see, how did you respond particularly 
It started with 
. during the 70s, becauFe it is very difficult, turbulent decade? 
a great deal of optimism after the 1971 election. · 'Garibi Hatao' was a 
very popular slogan and it crossed regional, caste, -language lines. People 
were talking about popular -awakening being finally able to use popular 
participation, carry out democratic social transformation, but, then the 
process of change was very slow. 

PRIME MINISTER : I don't think it was slow. 

QUESTION : Well, in one sphere, where there might have been basic structural 
transformations-the land reforms. 

PRlME MINISTER : But, before that nobodyrhad been able to do that at all. 
I would not call it slow. Even the Marxist Government had not been able 
to do it in West Bengal. The very fact that we were able to make a break-
through is a tremendous achievement. 

QUESTION : Well, were you satisfied? 

I am 
PRIME MINISTER : No, I am never satisfied. That is another thing. 
not satisfied and nobody who wants to do anything can be satisfied. 
I think 
once you are satisfied, in a way you are dead; it comes to an end, whereas 
life is a constant moving forward. But it is possible that much more could 
have been done. But a beginning was made; which nobody had been able 
to make before. 
Indian sociologists who were very critical of the slogan of 
'Garibi Hatao' and of our 20-Point Programme and various other pro-
gr.ammes, were forced to admit that they had made a difference to people. 
And when I fought my Chikmagalur election, you know, I was in the 
Opposition, and we asked the people why they were voting for us, they said : 

"You only have to see our houses, you have to see what we are . eating 
compared to what we ate before, you have to see how we are dressed 
compared to how we had before. So, in our minds there is just no question. 
We don't think there is a choice." And I see not just in that one place, but 
It does not 
in all my travels that the health of the people has improved. 
mean there are no pockets of poverty. But poverty is not at the same level 
as it used to be, regardless of what statistics say. 

Of course, when there is drought, then suddenly it is a big push 
backward because there is so little that they can fall back upon. Even so, 
whereas in 1966 we had a drought and had to beg for grain; now we had 
a very severe drought in 1979, but we did not have to get things. We do not 
have famine any more. During the drought we came in at the tail end; the 
earlier governments had not dealt with the problem as they should have. 
Distribution or organising of relief camps and so on was inadequate. Even 
so, we were able to . retrieve the situation. And now we are self-sufficient 
in food. 
The land question is never going to be solved, no matter what you do; 
because there is not enough land. You can at the most say you can: do 
better, you can take land· away from people who still have large holdings, 
and this we propose to do and according to existing law, but it is never going 
to be satisfactory because there is just not enough to go round. 

QUESTION : Given your answers to this question, your reaction to events 
after 1971, I am a bit diffident about asking the next question which is based 
on the assumption that you would have been disappointed from events of 

PRIME MINISTER : I would have been disappointed, but I do not think that 
disappointment could cover up the achievements. 

QUESTION : I think that is certainly a fair statement. The question I have 
in mind relates to the amendment of the Constitution made after 1971. You 
had said that you did not thinkGovernment was going to carry out any 
amendments and certainly you are not going to restrict Fundamental Rights. 
Then, after the fall, you became the first Prime Minister to give greater 
importance to Directive Principles than Fundamental Rights. This has 
.become a very critical issue, particularly for Americans who never under-
stand precisely why that should be done. 
In fact, if you were satisfied the 
way .things were going after the elections, why did you find it necessary to 
initiate the 24th Amendment which gave primacy to these clauses of 
Article 39? 

PRIME :tv1INISTER : Because if you don't follow up the Directive P.rinciples, 
It is not 
a large number of people do not get their Fundamental Rights. 

enough just to say that we are committed to these Fundamental Rights. 
How many people are actually enjoying them? You see, our society is so 
In spite of all our efforts, my 
heavily weighted towards the status quo. 
father's efforts, Mahatma Gandhi's efforts or anybody else's, it still is. Our 
Courts are very much in favour of those who have privileges. Even to make 
Fundamental Rights and the rights of the citizens real, to enable the citizens 
to avail themselves of the rights, the other part has to be implemented. 
Even today we cannot say, for instance, that the poorest people enjoy all the 
rights which are there in the Constitution. It is not because we are stopping 
them, but circumstances and society, social attitudes are such. 

QUESTION : What about the other controversial doctrine of committed 
judiciary and supersession of judges. 

PRIME MINISTER : We did not and do not have a committed judiciary. On 
the contrary, it was Janata Party Government who favoured a committed 
judiciary, committed the other way... . 
I personally never interfered in the appointment of any judge. Except 
those whom. I meet very formally, I never met the judges-or tried to get in 
touch with them. But there was a view, and this view was held by the then 
Chief Justice as well as the Law Minister and this view is being held now 
also by many people, that there should be greater movement of judges 
because if they stay in one place, they get involved with something or 
somebody, whereas if they go to another State, then they go with a fresh 
mind and are not involved with local things. 
It was on this basis that our 
then Chief Justice wanted very large number of them moved. 
I said such_ 
a large transfer of people was going to create a lot of confu·sion, but he felt 
very strongly on this issue. 

And when we use the word 'committed'-which we did use not with 
regard to the judiciary, but with regard to the bureaucracy-we did not 
mean committed to us; we mean committed to the country, because in the 
old tradition they were looking outside for guidance, I do not mean to a 
person or a Government or a thing, but generally the influence of the West 
ideologically was very strong. What we were trying to say is that our 
circun1stances are different, our needs are different, and we have to look at 
all these from the point of view of India's problems, not how the Americans 
would solve them. And this is what we meant. 

But the opposition always does tremendous propaganda. 

In my 
It 
father's time, we decided to have, what we call, co-operative farming. 
did not at all mean that land would be owned in common or anything like 
the Chinese communes or the Communist line of thinking. All we meant 
was that where people had very small holdings, if they could have something 
in common like a tractor and they worked together, then it would be easier 
for them to be more effective. They could plan their farming on co-operative 

. DEMOCRACY AND NATI;ONAL STRENGTH 

basis. 
In times of difficulty, there would be greater cushioning. This 
was how it was worked out. But there was tremendous propaganda that 
co-operative farming is the same as collective farming, and the whole idea 
had to be given up. 

At no time did we mean that judges should be harassed. When the 
Janata Party came in; they made all their appointments either on caste basis 
or on group basis. The Janata was not one party but several parties. That 
is how they broke up, because each was trying to promote his own party 
instead of the whole. At no time did we feel we wanted a committed 
judiciary except in the sense that we felt that the judges must have an idea 
of Indian conditions. The law is not something which is separate from the 
lives of the people. If you do not realize what the problems of the people 
are, then law would become irrelevant. 

I shall tell you something that happened in 1977, about two months 
after we lost the elections. This was reported to me by somebody who was · 
. in the JP movement and who was not at all with me at any time. . A· group 
of people who had followed JP and who had followed Vinoba Bhave, i.e;, 
With regard to the land movement and so on, went to different States and 
some of them came to see me before they went and one or two came after-
wards and they told me a story about Olissa. 
In our land distribution, we 
had given land to tribals in Orissa. · When the Janata Party came in, the 
landlords took back the land in Gujarat, Orissa and eastern UP. This 
particular person was rather aggressive and he asked some people for 
advice. They said, "You have a legal case. You have been officially given 
this land, the magistrate has given it. You go to the court and nobody can 
take it from you. You have not grabbed it illegally." So, he went to the 
court. But the judge decided almost without looking at the case; because 
he said government had no business to have land reforms at all. That land 
obviously was granted by somebody; nobody could have been born with 
that land. 
time or 
another. So he decided in favour of the landlord. This tribal went back 
and came back after a few days and he pushed his way into the court. 
People tried to restrain him, but he pushed his way and the Magistrate 
recognised him and said, "What have you come for, because justice was 
done on such and such day?" The man said, "Justice was not done on 
that day, but it is done now". He placed a parcel there and went away. 
It was the head of the landlord! 

.Most people who have property, grabbed it at one 

It may be we did not go fast enough, but you have to balance how far 
we can go without creating a situation where you cannot do anything. 
Even now, because of our stress on the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes, there is a movement against land reforms. Some castes ask, "Why 
should these people get so much land?" You have to some extent do a 
It is not that you are afraid of going faster, but if you go 
balancing act. 
faster, you may well be pushed back. 

. QUESnoN : On this _question of going faster, during the Emergency you did 
initiate more. sweeping Constitutional changes. Did that reflect any new 
thinking on your part about the need, in Indian conditions, to change the 
fundamental .assumptions of the Constitution? 

PR™1l MiNJSTER : No, only to make then1 work for the people. 

QUESTION : Well, since that time those measures have been repealed. The 
Supreme Court has struck down the changes in Article 31 C. What is your 
position now? Do you think that the Constitution should be amended 
again? 

PK(ME M~NiSTER : No. Now a change has taken. place because of the 
awakening among these people. Today, even those, who are fairly conser~ 
vative, cannot express that. conservatism, at least publicly; The· Jana ta . 
Go:ven1ment went two steps ahead of us .. They voted for the removal of · 
property from Fundamental Rights. The previous situation does not exist . 
now. 

QUESTION : You have a more favourable situation now. You don't have 
It seems that it is the 
the problem of leadership and party organization. 
case that India has relied on Nehru for over fifteen years since Independence 
and now there are even suggestions that Rajiv should son1ehow fill the void 
caused by Sanjay and so on. Are you concerned by this kind of tendency 
towards personal or family rule? Or can you reflect on the reasons why this 
condition should have developed, even though your father tried so hard to 
establish deeply rooted democratic institutions? 

PRIME M,msTBR : But how is it undemocratic? A person can only come 
forward if the people want that person .. And we have not thrust ap.y person 
on anybody. 

QUEST~ON : I think in the sense that people do not vote for institutions, but 
for individuals. 

PRiME MimgTER : They always look to individuals, even in the United States. 

QUESTION : I am not sure about that because the democratic process can 
throw up someone like Jimmy Carter or Ronald Reagan whom nobody 
had .... 

PRIME MiNISTER : No, but on the other hand; they are not voting for the 
Democratic Party or the Republican Party. They are voting either for 
Jimmy Carter or Mr. Reagan as people. 

DEMOCRACY AND N'ATiONAL STRENGTH 

QUEST~ON : Well, in the case of India, do you feel this is an adequate solution 
to the problem? 

PRIME MtN~STER : It is the question of who.they think can solve the problems. 
It does not mean that anybody in the Nehru family can do it. There have 
been others who wanted leadership, but they )lave not been able to get it. 

QUESTION : But even if they think there is a person who can do it, there is 
another problem arising, which I think you and your father ... 

PRIME MINISTER : It is largely the Press which has built up this thing that 
Sanjay wanted to be Prime Minister. Neither of my sons was remotely 
interested in politics, but because Sanjay was so criticized for his other things, 
he felt he had to protect himself. . Because I was Prime Minister I felt I 
could not protect him. This is how he came in, but even· then he did not 
want to be in politics. When he went through this terrible ordeal three 
. years ago, he started looking at things and got interested. But. even so; I 
. do not think he would have liked a political career; but it was the provocation 
of the Opposition that somehow thrust him step by.step .. Be~ause, either 
you say, "Well, I knuckle down and you can kill me", or you can fight back. 
It is the fighting-back that brought him into politics. 

QUESTION : My other question is about the state of the Congress Party and 
now the Congress (I). Every time it seems to have decayed as an institution. 
I do not know if you share this view. 

Pru;ME M~NISTaR : Well all parties have decayed, I would not say Congress 
alone. 
In fact the Congress has more cohesion than other except parties, 
of course tbe extremist parties. 

QUESTION : Well, it has decayed in the sense than in party units nobody is 
elected. They are nominated. There have been two splits that have 
weakened the organization. 

Pru;ME MiN~STER : No, the splits have strengthened the Party. We would 
not have won the election if we had the old Congress. No doubt about it. 

QUESTION : Do you have any plan to put another elected party organization 
in place of the present one ? 

PRIME Mi~STER : Every time we want to have election; there is some crisis. 
When I say,· "Have an election", they say, "You cannot have the Party 
election_ when there isParlia1nentary election orStateelection." But soon we 
shall have the elections now that there are no national elections on the scene. 

QuEsnoN : Do you think the Congress (I) will be able to play the same role 
without the leadership. of Sanjay? 

PruME MINISTER : Sanjay was not giving leadership to the Congress. 

QUESn~N ; No, to the Youth Cong1ess. 

PRIME MINISTER : We have good people there, I think they will find ... 

QUESTION : As to the final general question and keeping in mind the nature 
of the audience which is young and mainly Western, but also Indian, what 
qualities of leadership and achievements in domestic and international 
politics would you like to be known for among your young people who are 
interested in your career? 
.. PRIME MINISTER : I am not interested to be kriown at an .. 

QUESTION 
valuable that you have learnt on the basis of your experience? 

: · Is there. anything in partic:ular that you consider specially 

PRIME MINISTER : I have learnt a great deal. 
I think one learns something 
everyday. But I think that largely my experience has only deepened what 
I felt before for India and the Indian people. 
I think they are pretty 
wonderful people; they deserve much better than they have got. It is within 
t~.eir capability to work for it and to get it. That is why it is so unfortunate 
that politics here means :fighting, instead of people working for a common 
goal. You talk about democracy. They are now planning major 
agitations everywhere. There was a rape case in Baghpat. N<YI'>ody is 
condoning rape_. But it is not a new thing, it has been happening ahd has 
happened a great deal at the time ofJanata Party rule also. Many of them 
used to come to me and tell me. We did not think it was something that 
was to be shouted about. 
I did say that action should be taken. We 
approached the police, whoever we could. We did not think it was some-
thing that should be publicised that way. On the basis of this, they are now 
having a major agitation in U.P. at a time when there are floods, when so 
many other things have to be done. This is what really weakens democracy. 

QUESTiON : Are you able to say, what you think the major problems 
concerning India will be in the next five years? 

PRIME MINISTER : The immediate problems, of course, are the fuel problem, 
power shortage, and inflation, which we share with all the world. Only 
it is much worse for us for two reasons. Firstly, we are in between, I mean, 
parts of India are developed and large parts are undeveloped or developing. 

DEMOCRACY AND NATiONAL STRENGTH 

So, we have the disadvantages of both the situations. And we are so big 
that nobody can bail us out. We just have to stand on our own feet. 

At a Turning Point 
AFTER A FEW years I have again the privilege to unfurl our dear national 
:flag from this historic place. 
This should have been an occasion for rejoicing, but my heart is full of 
sorrow. The incident which has taken place in Moradabad, not very far 
from here, has.inflicted an injury to our country. Our sympathies are with 
the families of all those who have died or have been injured or have suffered 
in some way. On behalf of all of you I offer my sympathies to them. 
.. should like to say that whoever has·played mischief or·is guilty, whether he 
is art official or a non-official, will be very severely punished. At the same 
time, I urge upon you that we should not allow the feeling of communalism, 
casteism or of revenge to spread. 

It is the duty of everyone, in every city or village, to use all our energy 
to 1naintain peace and law and order. The poison of communalism has 
been there in our society for many years. We had thought that the 
martyrdom of Gandhiji had eliminated this poison but we see how easily 
it bursts out again. 

You know that from my childhood I have been taught that special 
attention should be given to the weaker sections in our country-whether 
they are weak because of their numbers or because of poverty and backward-
ness. Our first duty is to protect them, help them and to raise them up, 
·because.only then cau there be peace in our society. We have all to get on 
to this task. We have to think why these things, which had been controlled 
or were in check, have again emerged, particularly during the last three 
years. Besides communalism, casteism has surfaced in a powerful manner. 
There must be some conspiracy and some kind of effort that on every 
issue there is some agitation or some clash or violence, so that no work is 
done. 

Violence and lawlessness have spread all over the country. If we do 
not succeed in putting a stop to it, we shall not be able to accomplish 
It is like a river which breaks its banks and overflows in every 
anything. 
. It can only 
Its water then can be of little use or beneficence. 
direction. 
cause harm to the people. Such is the present state of affairs. Such groups 

Free rendering of the Independence Day speech delivered in Hindi from the Red Fort, 
Delhi, August 15, 1980 

-.-•-:-·C-'.- --..r .... -.. -···· - - , ... 

•. :---c-o._ . 

were encouraged and a climate was created in the country so that people 
could grab anything they could get. 

We know that in a poor and backward country everybody has demands 
to make. Some of these can be just demands, the people need those things. 
But the question is how the demands should be put forward. Can agitations, 
which impose burdens on others, take our country forward? And if the 
country cannot march forward, then how can the demands be satisfied? 

We have to stop this lawlessness. We have to remove the weaknesses 
that have crept in at every level, not only among the youth, but in the entire 
society and in the administration. 

We find that the discipline; the spirit of working together, the spirit of 
marching together, the spirit of sacrifice and the spirit of service which were 
there earlier have disappeared now. People say that so many months have 
gone by but nothing has been done, but when water is spilt, can it again be 
I assure you that it is my earnest endeavour to bring about 
collected easily? 
improvement in the administration so that it may accomplish its tasks with 
dedication, patriotism, courage and speed. 

Corruption· has gone up and I am amazed at the extent of its increase 
at every level. We must root it out, whether it is in bureaucracy or in 
politics, whether it is in high places or low. Whoever it may be, we have to 
check this vigorously so that the instruments for implementing our policies 
are sharpened and take our programmes forward. 

One of our main tasks is to see how to strengthen the services, whose 
duty it is to protect society. They should· be enabled to do their work 
better and win the confidence and friendship of the people. 

We are not unaware of the difficulties which we are facing today. 
There is the problem of Assam; where a p?werful a~itation has been going 
on. 

I regarp. the children and students of Assam as my own children. 

It is our earnest effort to remove their difficulties 
have sympathy for them. 
which are genuine and have substance. But I would also tell them that it 
is not correct to hold the country to ransom and cause suffering to the nation. 
I believe that there are some sections, small in number but determined to do 
mischief, who want to take undue advantage of this agitation or for that 
matter any agitation anywhere else. 

At some places, anti-social elements come to the surface; at others, anti-

national elements raise their heads. If this evil, this poison, however small, 
is not combated it can spread and cause great damage. 
I have no doubt 
that the people of Assam and other parts of the country will not allow this 
poison to spread and will bravely fight the evil forces, agitation or no 
agitation. 

Prices have risen and I know fully well the agoni~s of our people, parti· 
cularly the difficulties and burdens on housewives and on women. But you 
also know the reasons why prices have gone up. 

DEMOCRACY AND NATrONAL STRENGTH 

The prices of some commodities like oil; diesel and fertilizers are not 
wholly in our hands. But there are other commodities the prices of which 
could be under check. But how can the prices come down if there are 
agitations, if so much of money has to be spent on maintaining law and ora.er 
and on fulfilling the demands of some sections of the people? 

I appeal to you all, to the entire society, to sisters and brothers, to old 
and young, to realize that they also have some responsibility in the matter. 
Of course, it is the responsibility of the traders at this time not to take 
advantage of the difficulties and the helplessness of the people. It is also 
the responsibility of the people not to buy non-essential goods. Each in his 
own way should see what he can do in this direction. 

If something improper is being done, if the ration shop is not being run 
properly, or if the traders are raising prices without reason; people should 
see what they can do. 
I can assure them that the government will fully 
co-operate with them in this task. But unless there is full backing of the 
people, .this rampant evil cannot be easily curbed . 

. At the sanie time there is no problem which we cannot solve if you help 
If we had recorded some aclijevements earlier, it was not 
and co-operate. 
because of any outside support, but because of the support and co-operation 
you gave us. We were able to consolidate the nation's power and did not 
allow it tci be frittered away. You and we were thus able to achieve some 
remarkable things. 

If agricultural production or industrial production increased, it was 
because of the sweat and labour of the Indian people. Today, we have again 
to revive the spirit of working hard. 

The farmers of India are our very backbone. The country cannot 

survive without them, nor can we achieve self-reliance. 

Cultivators are today in disress because of rising prices and 

the 
shortage of some inputs: We are trying our best to help them in every 
possible way . 

After the terrible drought of last year, the rains have been fairly good 
so far this year. This has brought some relief. But many people have 
suffered because of floods. 
I offer my sympathies to the flood-affected 
people. 

We have to increase the agriculture production in all possible ways so 
that our needs are met and foodgrains and other essential commodities are 
taken to the people in remote areas, whether they live in mountains, in forests 
or in deserts. 

Similarly, industrial workers constitute the foundation of a modem 
nation. We can help our agriculture and strengthen the country only if 
our factories are kept running and industrial production goes up. 

Our problems are many. But India is not the only country which faces 
It is a world-wide phenomenon. Even the bigger 
an economic crisis. 
nations are facing all the problems that we face. But this is no excuse for us. 

No single country or a group of countries can help us. We have got 
to stand on our own feets and march towards the goal of self-reliance. And 
I think that one of the major causes of the lack of discipline and selfishness 
that we see around us is that we have given up the tried and tested path 
during the last three years. Our basic policies and objectives and our ideals 
which bad inspired us to march forward were repudiated and new ways 
sought out. We would have understood if they did find a new way, but they 
went in different directions. This was the reason why all those who had 
come together broke up and our speed slowed down. 

Wherever there is poverty and backwardness, internal danger is always 
present; but, today there is external danger also. You are not unaware of 
the state of affairs around our country, of the massive arn1s build-up that is 
going on. Earlier, the danger came only from one or two directions; but 
today the vast ocean is also full of all kinds of military concentrations. So, 
the peril to us has further aggravated. 

Our policy has always been that of friendship and it will continue to be 
so.· We extend our hand of friendship, especially towards our neighbouring 
countries. The Government and the people of India know very well that 
nothing comes out of confrontation. 
It is only through co-operation and 
friendship that everyone can solve problems and help each other. 

Whosoever tries to weaken us, puts pressure on us or is hostile to us, 
we shall face then1 unitedly, not through weapons, not through.war, but on 
the basis of our strength, our stabiiity, our unity and our ideals. 

It has been our desire to show to the world that the countries of the 
entire sub-continent and those outside can live together and work together. 
But again, there is confrontation between countries. As I said earlier, no 
one can help~ country.as large as India. We have to stand on our own 
feet. Any help can at best be marginal. If we fall, nobody can lift us. 
We have to rise ourselves. 

Our country can ensure its security on its own. 

It cannot depend on 
others. This is why we lean neither towards this country nor that, neither 
towards this bloc nor that bloc. 

We are Indians and India is our concern. The building up of India 
is our endeavour. Whatever is our policy, whatever is our direction and 
whatever steps or programmes we undertake, they are all designed only to 
make the people of India strong and to raise them above poverty and back-
wardness. This is our only objective. 

I wish to assure our neighbouring countries that our people desire 
friendship with them. We do not want war. We know that there cannot 
be agreement on everything. There are bound to be differences among 
nations as among individuals. But wherever there is similarity of views, we 
should help each other,-work together and co-operate with each other. If 
we are prepared to do that, much of our expenditure could be cut down and 
we can become stronger. But if anybody threatens us, we are prepared for it. 

DEMOCRACY AND NAT~ONAL STRENGTH 

Present here amidst us today are the brave jawans of our three Services. 
No praise is too high for them. They are constantly engaged in the service 
of people, whether in war or peace. We, the citizens of India, are also 
soldiers of a kind, whether we put on a uniform or not. 
It is our duty· to 
further strengthen our defence forces through unity among ourselves. 

I see before me a large number of children, the hope and promise of 
India. What kind of future do we want to build for them? We have to 
work today for that future. 
If our young men, our farmers and workers, 
our middle-class and housewives and people of other professions get lost 
in the worries of the day and cannot come out of the present day crisis, how 
shall we march forward and complete the journey? 

More than 28 crore people of our country were born after Independence. 
They have no conception of the appalling poverty that existed in India 
before Independence, the insults and indignities which were inflicted upon 
Indian citizens, our religion and our culture. Almost a miraculous change 

. has taken place during these years. 
· All our problems have not been solved but; one by one, many problems 
have also been set right. 
If your co-operation is forthcoming, many more 
will be solved. 

When our Government was formed, I had said, "Let us forget what 
happened in the past. Let us again be united." We may have different 
policies and cannot adopt identical programmes. At the same time, no 
obstacles should be created in the way of building up of the nation. 

Democracy can function only when the Government and the Opposition 
parties accept each other and try to work in harmony. This does not mean 
that the Opposition has no right to oppose. That right is inherent in a 
democracy. But no attempt should be made to stop the functioning of the 
Goyernment. 

Who suffers-the Government or the people-when work stops? And 
when the people suffer, the worst hit.are the poor, particularly the women. 
Who will suffer if the schools and colleges are closed? Certainly 
the 
children whose years of education are wasted. We should consider all this. 
We are at a turning point in the life of our country. Either we gain 
- all or we lose all. Of course, it is the responsibility of the Government to 
implement programmes but it is equally up to the Opposition parties and 
also to you who are citizens of India. We should understand these 
problems. 

During our freedom struggle, we marched forward unitedly and in a 
disciplined fashion. We had then no thought of our own selves, nor of our 
demands. Were there no demands then? Was there no agony or suffering 
when we were fighting for independence? There were few employment 
opportunities in those days. Availability of goods was meagre, people 
were pushed around and there was discrimination against us in our own 
railways. But Gandhiji turned all the suppressed and illiterate people into 

a strong force which shook the entire world. That power is still within us. 
Only a fraction of that power is represented at the Red Fort today and 
the rest-the vast masses of the people-are spread in the four comers of 
tbe country. 

We are a powerful force, a force for culture; a force for wisdom of tbe 
kind hardly seen in any other country. Shall we fritter away this asset? 
We have a precious heritage. Shall we throw it away? We have to consider 
all this. 

Our goal is to make India great. We want to make India strong. We 
do not ask for anything from the world. All we seek is peace. All we seek 
is to strengthen our freedom. All we want is to establish true democracy 
in our country-democracy not for the few but for the poorest of the poor, 
so that their problems are solved, so that they can have two full meals a day 
and be usefully employed and preserve their self-respect. 

It is these things we want for our country. Only when we are able to 
provide these things can we say that the vow which our leaders had. taken, 
the pledge J awaharlal Nehru took for the first time. at this spot .-under this 
flag, has been fulfilled. 

Independence, the dream' which Gandhiji shared with us and said we 
should do or die to reach it, has been realized.. But we have to go ahead. If 
we stand together, 
is no task which we cannot accomplish, no 
problem that we cannot solve and no danger that we cannot face. 

there 

I call upon you once again to rise and march ahead. We have fallen 
down sometimes, we may fall down again, but we shall rise and move 
forward and reach our destination. 

Brothers and sisters, I appeal to you again to look to the future and 
not to the present. The future of India, your future, is bright and shining. 
Sometimes its very glitter can dazzle our vision, but we have to move forward 
to that glorious future and raise our country to a much higher plane . 

NCC: Link Between Defence and Education 
IN A MODERN nation, everyone must have defence consciousness and 
some defence skills also. During the colonial times, there was a systematic 
effort to make our nation forget its military traditions. 
Indians were often 
denied the higher positions. There was a divorce of military training from 

Inaugural speech at the conference of State Representatives and the Directors 01 Nationaf · 
Cadet Corps, New Delhi, August 20, 1980 

DEMOCRACY AND NA.TONAL STRENGTH 

the educational system. The result was the emasculation of the nation. 
That was why the very right to bear arms was one of the demands of the 
earlier nationalist leaders like Naoroji and Tilak. 

In the first and second world wars, the British themselves realized the 
need to enlarge the_ army and to enlist Indian personnel for defence. The 
University Training Corps was started in World War I, and, the National 
Cadet Corps, in its present form, owes its origin to World War II. 

I think the NCC is an important link between .defence and our educa-

tional syste1n. The Defence Forces have their own training academies and 
establishments, but the NCC is a good nursery for persons wishing to take 
up full-time defence career. 
In our times; civilians also should have some 
military skills, although I sincerely hope they will not be used against · 
civilians as they sometimes are. 

The NCC enables students to prepare for greater participation in case 
of conflict with other nations. Young men and women are rightly eager 
and proud to join . the NCC. There is the romance of.the uniform, but I 
a~ specially glad. that a sense of adventure, which our. natiqn. was sadlY. . 
lacking, is now . growing. 

I was happy to hear, in the report of programme like the last year's 

two mountaineering expeditions-of the boys to Mount Simvu in Kanchen-
junga massif and of the girls to Mount Trishul-and this year's girls' 
expedition to Bunder Punch. They are commendable efforts in mountain-
eering. As you perhaps know mountains are one of my great loves in life. 
I welcome the girls' trek to the base camp of Mt. Everest and the boys' 
expeditions which are now in the offing. 

It is significant that far from lagging behind, girl cadets ai:e in the lead 
in many of these worthy but difficult adventures. The enthusiastic response 
of cadets to other adventure-oriented activities, such as parachuting, riding, 
skiing, sailing, gliding, powered flying, diving, and the other items that you 
have mentioned, is encouraging. To capture and maintain the interest of -
young.·people it is essential to constantly endeavour to introduce new 
adventurous activities which can satisfy their aspirations. I should like you 
to devote particular attention to this and to think of many more such 
pursuits which are within our means to organize. I hope that a large number 
of cadets from all States will participate in these activities which contribute 
to national fitness, mould character and help to develop a more complete 
personality. 

There are some complaints that the NCC is not being run as it should. 
Probably there is no truth in it, but such gossip has been going round. Some 
students have come to me with tales of disillusionment. It should be ensured 
that all instructors fulfil their assignments and give an impression to the 
young people, of their own enthusiasm and earnestness. 

And, while I am on the subject of gossip, I would like to say that gossip 
is a very big weapon of enemy. Those of you who have been through 

periods of war know what tremendous effort is made to demoralise the 
nation through gossip. One of the large number of posters that were put 
up in England during the World War II showed a huge ear-with a slogan 
urging not to speak unnecessarily because the enemy's ear is everywhere. 
Anqther poster said : ''Do not lend your ears to idle gossip." We find that, 
not only in these matters but in political matters as well, gossip seems to 
be a major industry in our country. 
I would request all cadets and all those 
responsible for their training to be on the look-out. The major purpose of 
gossip is to demoralize us by spreading rumours that either we cannot do a 
thing or we are doing it wrong or we are weak, others are stronger and so on. 
Many others are stronger than us. There is no denying that. But there is 
also no denying that we have made tremendous effort, and, the very fact 
that we have got where we are, shows that that effort has made some impact 
and that we have achieved success in all areas and, of course, in the training 
and the performance of the National Cadet Corps. So, all dedicated 
people, young and old, should try to scotch this insidious spreading of 
· rumours amongst the public. 
The NCC can make a vaiuable contribution towards national 
integration and character-building and this lays an onerous responsib1lity. 
on your shoulders. 
I am sure that you are fully alive to this and will carry 
out your deliberations with this thought in mind. The NCC must make a 
marked contribution to the improvement in efficiency and discipline not only 
amongst the cadets but in the nation as a whole and especially amongst the 
young people and students. The motto of the NCC is unity and discipline. 
Both are the needs of the hour for our nation and it is something which we 
shall always need. 
I think even countries which ar~ far ahead of us 
economically or militarily are equally in need of this motto and of 
following it. 

I have great pleasure in inaugurating your conference and I wish success 
.to your deliberations. You are already full of enthusiasm and en~rgy, 
and, I hope, that you will be able to imbue not only the cadets but through 
them the nation, as a whole, with it. 

Need for Peace and Harmony 
SHRI KAMARAJ BEGAN as a worker here, rose to the leadership of 
Tamil Nadu, and finally his influence and respect for him spread all over 

From speech at the foundation-laying ceremony of Kamara) ·Memorial, Madras, 
September 30; 1980 

the country. He was a man of the people. He could feel the heartbeat, the 
pulse of the ordinary people in Tamil Nadu and what they wanted. and, 
because people's needs are more or less the same wherever they live, he had 
his fingers on the pulse of the nation. He was a good administrator and 
during his period as Chief Minister here, Tamil Nadu made very notable 
progress. 

This place where we have gathered today is also a historic place. For 
it was here, I am told, that Kamaraj Ji used to collect his workers and many 
important decisions were taken sitting under the tree. 

Much has happened since those old days. We had thought, not only 
we, in India, but people all over the world had thought, that with the advance 
in science, in medicine, in education, there would be a peaceful revolution 
in all the developing countries. We had thought that the big powers, having 
seen the frightfulness of nuclear and other weapons, would try to resolve 
their differences in a peaceful manner; that the whole world would-devote· 
its energie~ to reform and change and bring in a better life to the people, 
and specially to _the eradication of poverty and econoniic backwardness. 
This dream has dimmed coilsiderabiy; We find that nuclear stockpiles 
are increasing and whereas we, who wanted to·use nuclear energy only for· 
peaceful purposes, are being blamed and criticized, 
those who were 
stockpiling for military purposes are. going ahead whh it. And, today, 
there is crisis not only in our country, not only in other poor and developing 
countries, but even in the developed and the rich countries. Whenever there 
is any such difficulty, although it hits all people, it is n1uch_ worse for those 
who are poor or weaker. That is why we, in India, face a specially critical 
situation. 

In the short period when Congress was not in power, we find that the 
nation fell backward in many areas because not sufficient interest or encoura-
gement was given to the people of science, the people of education and the 
people iri many other such areas. Most of all, it was our industry whiyh 
suffered. 

You will remember that in111y previous regime we had managed to 
bring down prices. We had curbed inflation. We had increased our 
industrial production, our foreign exchange and our exports. 

In every direction, India was forging ahead. 

In international affairs, 
for peace and harmony and for 

we had exerted our 
co-operation with the developing countries to solve economic problems. 

influence 

But when we came back to governn1ent in the beginning of this year, 
we found an entirely different situation. We found the machinery, which 
should have been working, completely in disorder. Although we are putting 
it together, it is still not as it should be. 

We have managed to control the law and order situation to a great 
extent. 
It is true that .lately there has been some c01nmunal trouble but I 
want to tell you that it did not start as a communal trouble. It started as a 

in spreading baseless propaganda. And, 

consequence of a deliberate effort to create trouble between some sections 
of the people and the government, fe., the police or the local authorities. 
We had found in our last regime and while we were out of power that there 
were some groups, some parties which had become expert in rumour 
mongering, 
this is the same 
machine which is starting to work again. When they spread casteism, 
communalism or this kind of poison which erodes our society, it is very 
dangerous. This is what has happened in two or three towns of northern 
India. My heart is full of sorrow that our brothers and sisters of the 
minority community have suffered. Lives have been lost, property has been 
damaged; and, a flourishing community has suffered so much that it will 
take considerable time and resources to set it on its feet again. Now, w_ hen 
we try to help them, some people make propaganda amongst the others 
that we are only for the mino,ities and do not care for the majority; and, 
therefore, the majority must become aggressive. The same people then go 
to the minority communities and say : "You have suffered. Unless·you . 
become aggressive, nobody is going to save you." The same people go to 
the police also and say, "Because a policeman was killed, you must also 
do something. You must take revenge." This is how an atmosphere of 
suspicion, of distrust, of fear and aggressiveness was created in these places. 
However, fortunately, it is now under control, and I hope that we shall be 
able to keep it under control. We are for the interests of all sections of the 
people, all the religions that :flourish in India, all the languages that are 
spoken in our country. We want to see that they all get a fair deal, but we 
have to see that those who are weaker or more backward get special help, 
otherwise there cannot be peace and harmony in society. And, only 
if 
there is peace and harmony, will we have the strength to help the whole 
country to go forward. That is why whether it was Mahatma Gandhi or 
my father, Maulana Azad or Kamaraj, they always worked for the 
poorest and the weakest. Not becaut1e we want to neglect anybody but 
unless we build up this, which is the base of the country, 'even those who 
think they are on the top cannot survive or flourish. 

In these months, since we have been there, we have been able to bring 
back the self-confidence of our scientists, we have been able to go ahead 
in the :field of industry and we think that even in agriculture there will be 
a difference. Perhaps you remember that because of the wrong policies 
followed earlier, specially towards our agriculturists and the producers of 
sugarcane, our farmers refused to plant sugarcane next year and there was 
a tremendous shortage of it. This is part of the reason for the rise in the 
price of sugar, but even with all the rise in its price, I would like to remind 
you that sugar is still much cheaper in India than in any other country in 
two-thirds of the sugar is made available at a very low 
the world. Also, 
price through the ration shops. 
It is only the extra sugar, the free sale 
sugar, which has gone up in price. 

The other great problem as you know is of petrol. There are many 
things we can do in the country but, for many other things, we are dependent 
on what happens in the rest of the world. 
Just as we thought that we have 
sufficient petrol, and for the moment we .still have sufficient petrol, we 
are worried because of the happenings in our neighbourhood, specially 
the new war that is there, because it will have an effect on this whole region. 
Both the countries Iran and Iraq are our friends and we do not want to 
see either of them suffer. We have always believed, and the Non aligned 
Movement has also believed, that any differences should be resolved 
through negotiations. 
India has always tried to lessen tensions; sometimes 
we have succeeded, sometimes we have not. But it is an effort which 
we must continue in the interest of world peace as well as of our 
own. 

While we face these critical problems, while the world situation is so 
explosive, it is sad to see that here, in our country, instead of everybody 
getting together to try arid see how the country can get outof the rut, how 
. it can once more be put on the path of progress, we see a kind of opposition 
which · o_bstructs rather than helps progress. · The task of the Opposition 
is to build itself up and to oppose. We do not want to come in their way, 
in their legitimate right. But, in our system, it also means that just as the 
Government has a responsibility to allow the Opposition to function so 
has the Opposition a responsibility to allow the Government to function. 
Just when we had· the shortage of oil and our people were groaning under 
the burden of not enough kerosene, not enough diesel, what was happening 
in Assam? The Opposition parties were supporting an agitation. There 
are demands, sometimes genuine and sometimes not so genuine, in different 
parts of the country. We can always sit together and try to solve them. 
But if you say, "No, unless it is solved we are not going to allow them to take · 
what is in our State, no matter how the country suffers or the poor suffer." 
If every State were to take that attitude; them would be no India. It just 
would not survive. Every State has something to take and something to 
give. 
It is when we work togethetin the spirit of give and take, of helping 
others, 
that we can all strengthen the country. Because we have 
industrialized to an extent, a lot of people think that we cannot be treated 
as a poor or developing country. So, in a way, our very progress has created 
some difficulty. Because we want to be independent, because we want 
to be self-reliant and stand on our feet, many people· of other countries 
do not like this also. 

Tamil Nadu has given a lot to the rest of India in culture, in industry, 
in agriculture and above all, in its talented people. 
In a way, one can 
say; they are ruling the country because, I think, we still have in Delhi more 
people from Tamil Nadu than from any other state. So, now we must all 
make· that major effort for unity, for discipline which can get the country 
moving again. 

I believe there are some parties, called leftist parties, which have been 
criti~izing some of the ordinances. Now, these are not there to curb any 
individual's freedom. They are there only to help us to curb wrong-doing 
If the few people, who do hoarding or 
and anti-social activities. 
black marketing or smuggling or other such activities are allowed to go 
ahead and do what they like, it is the mass of the people who suffer, it is 
democracy in India that suffers because the rest of the people cannot exert 
their civil rights to live and work as they wish. That is why we have taken 
I think that the people as a whole have welcomed them 
such measures. 
because it is for their security and for their welfare that these have been 
taken. We, in the Congress,· have always been deeply committed to 
democracy as an ideal and also as a practical necessity. But some of the 
things which we have been permitting here are not permitted in other 
countries because it disrupts the life of the majority. If we face. a great · 
danger; the country must be mobilized-as one man to meet the chailenge. 
And there is need today of unity, of discipline, of deep commitment not to 
a party, not to a particular . programme-·. although . we think that our 
programmes -are in the national interest-but to the nation as a whole. What 
do all of us together-men, women, children, young and old of all the 
professions-· give to Mother India? Today is not the time to ask : What is 
Mother India giving to us? What do we give? Kamaraj and the others were 
prepared to give their lives to the nation, :first to the freedom struggle and 
afterwards to develop the country. Now it is our turn. What are we 
prepared to give? This is the question which each citizen of India 1nust 
ask himself .... 

I do think that on certain national problems there should be a national 
attitude, not a party attitude, e.g., of keeping India strong and free and 
putting it on the path of economic development. We da combine when 
there i~ aggression and war, why cannot we work together to meet this 
challenge which is just as great? 

So, this is my prayer and my appeal to all of you and speciaUy to my 
sisters because they, above all, should want peace and harmony for their 
sons, their children, for their brothers, for their husbands, for their fathers. 
Let us all pledge ourselves on this sacred ground, on this historic ground, 
to make an effort for peace and harmony amongst all communities, for the 
lessening of bitterness and hatred, and then to work together not to want 
anything but to give to make our country strong, and, to realize the dream 
of our leaders. 

Parliamentary Democracy in India 

THE SUBJECT rs an important one: 
'Indian Politics and Parliamentary 
Democracy'. 
I do not think I have anything new to say on it. All of you 
know that our democracy is a legacy of 11:ahatma Gandhi and parliamentary 
democracy is a legacy of Jawaharlal Nehru. Gandhiji, when he came on 
the shores of India, understood that this country is much too vast to fol1ow 
the pattern of any other country. 
In the freedom struggle, he built up a 
mass-based organization. 
It is this mass base that was the strength of the 
Congress Party and led us to success. Then there was Jawaharlal Nehru, 
another strong believer in democracy. The ideological part of democracy 
had made a great 1mpact.on him during his studies abroad. But during the 
. struggle he realized more firmly that a country of this size and great diversity 
. · could be s~stained only through a democratic system. This is my own . 

view also. 

People, especially foreign correspondents and 

leaders, have often 
asked the question whether democracy is suitable for India. My reply to 
them is that democracy allows n1any small explosions which one can handle 
one at a time. But, if you put a lid on these small explosions, there 
would be a big explosion in the form of violent revolution, which 
you may not be able to handle at all. So, this is the only system that 
suits us. 

But the question has been increasingly asked in our country, as in other 

I have been get-

countries, on the manner in which it has been working. 
ting letters from the United States of America asking for literature on our 
system because they feel that their system is not the right thing for them. 
I have been receiving letters from the United Kingdom also. They feel that 
there are many lacunae in their system. So, this is not a malady which is 
afflicting only India, it is the same thing all over the world. 
It is not that 
our system is wrong. What is wrong is not the system, but, how we work 
it. What has happened here is that we have tied ourselves more and more 
in red tape and we simply do not know how to disentangle ourselves. This 
is what has gone wrong. 

There is no system which is perfect. Whichever system you adopt is 
going to have its good points and bad points and we have to see how to 
mitigate these difficulties." 

Some constitutional pundits try to trace our present system to the various 
Government of India Acts. If this was so, I would ask a very simple question: 

From speech at a seminar on 'Indian Politics and Parliamentary Democracy', Badkhal 

· Lake (Haryana), October 8, 1980 

it not take root in Pakistan, for instance, where they have had 

Why did 
the same Acts? 
is said 

It 

that all 

the Latin American countries have the same 
structure as the United States. But it works only in the United States 
and not in Latin American countries. So, everything depends on how you 
work it, on the spirit of the people, their sense of involvement, their 
dedication and their feeling of discipline. Gandhiji, Jawaharlal Nehru 
and some of our other leaders, the Congress itself, shaped our people. They 
were successful in getting all sections, all classes, all religions into the national 
movement. Not only did they build a mass-based political party in the 
· process, they also educated the people in the responsibilities that democracy 
entails. 

I have sometimes been misunderstood because of the stress I have laid 
on the relationship between democracy and discipline. This is not just 
It was Gandhiji who instilled 
an idea that I have happened to bring in. 
· . this idea into us. He pointed out that there is no privilege without a 
corresponding obligation, there is no right whhout its corresponding duty. 
All his speeches had this underlying idea. My father also spoke repeatedly 
on this subject. On one occasion, he said : "Parliamentary democracy 
It demands 
demands many virtues. 
devotion to work. But it demands also a large measure of co-operation, 
of self-discipline, of restraint." 

It demands, of course, ability. 

There is no democracy if there is no discipline. 

this which 
differentiates democracy fron1 moboci:acy. Both words, you know, mean role 
of the people. But whereas one is civilized, the other is not. Sir Winston 
Churchill once said, and I have quoted this often, that of all forms of govern-
ment, parliamentary democracy is ihe most fragile and the most difficult, yet 
no better system has been devised by man. I would add: democracy is fragile 
if tJ+ere is no discipline, but invincible if there is self-restraint .... 

It is 

It is sometimes said that democracy can work only if there is consensus .. -
Frankly, I do not understand this at all. 
Is there a consensus between the 
Labour and the Conservative parties in the United Kingdom, or. between 
the Republicans and the Democrats in the United States? These are 
competing parties, and in India also, there is vast difference in ideology, 
in objectives, in methods of work between us and the different parties. 
do believe there are items and subjects on which we should be together. For 
instance, the communal situation. This has nothing to do with party 
politics. Everybody should join in creating an atmosphere of harmony 
and calming down the hatred, suspicion and mistrust which burst out on 
such occasions. But you cannot sit with people who are diametrically 
If another party believes that 
opposed to you. We believe in socialism. 
socialism is the greatest evil, how are we going to get together on economic 
subjects? .If we believe in secularism and if there is another party, which 
does not believe in it, no matter what it says publicly, which believes that 

DEMOCRACY AND NAT~ONAL STRENGTH 

this matter? 

there should be rule of one religion, state religion, how can we sit together 
with them on 
Incidentally, our meaning of the word 
'secularism' is not the dictionary meaning, because the dictionary defines 
it as lack of religion, whereas our meaning is equal respect for and dignity 
of all the religions. 

We can, of course, take up items which are common and co-operate 
on those. And personally I shall be very happy if you find more and more 
such subjects. But it is not realistic to think that this could work on all 
subjects .... 

There could be not only difference but even fierce competition politically, 
but all parties and all the sides must be proud of the nation and they n1ust 
not do anything that will weaken the system. This agreement is an abso-
lute essential. A well-known book, and one which most of us have studied 
in schools and colleges, is Ivor Jennings' Cabinet Government: And it 
starts with the following statement : "The Cabinet is the core of the British 
constitutional system.'' A few lines later it adds tha:t until 1937 the Cabinet . 
. w.as not even mentioned in. any Act of Parliament. Parlian1ent had existed 
for centuries; it first consisted only of the nobles and rich landlords and there · 
was no representation of the people as a whole. 
Its purpose was merely 
It was only in the 19th century that the relative 
to contain the King. 
jurisdictions of monarch, Parliament and Cabinet were worked out. 
In 
America, the executive and the legislature exist and mostly are at loggerheads 
with each other. The parliamentary system makes the executive accoun-
table to the legislature, the duty of explaining, dissenting or accepting the 
executive's action demands detailed knowledge and skill to expound. The 
work of the Opposition party is easier than that of the ruling party. 
In 
England, a former cabinet minister, somey ears ago, published a book which 
showed how the power of the Cabinet had grown in England and, within 
the Cabinet, that :of the Prime Minister. He related how Attlee, little by 
little, was overpowering and even the Cabinet was assumiag a secondary 
It is the same with all the other Prime Ministers who have followed. 
role. 
I am not saying it is a good or bad thing. 
I am only pointing out the 
development that is taking place in most countries .... 

In the United Kingdom, Parliament's law making powers are unlimited. 
The courts only interpret the law. 
In our country, because of our written 
constitution, the court has the power to strike down some Acts or legislation. 
S0n1e of our opposition parties have begun to propound the theory that the 
courts are the only custodian of den1ocracy. This is a travesty. At the 
time of the Emergency, the same gentlemen again began talking about the 
supremacy of the Judiciary over the Legislature. 
I can only say that any 
attempt seriously to whittle down the power of Parliament will lead to 
erosion of democracy. 

To those who are admirers of the United States judiciary, I can point 
out that there the highest court has the wisdom to avoid show down with 

the Government elected by the people. There is a quip that the argument 
that most impresses the U.S. judges is the voting figure. 

We can take some comfort from the fact that democracy has taken 
root in our country. But the growing habit of personal c;!.enigration and the 
preaching of personal hatred will strike at the root of this growing tree .... 
We have, apart from the initial foundation of democracy, many times 
helped the people to get better educated and better involved. 
I got a good 
I do not 
inkling of this when Mr. Giri stood for the Presidential election. 
Jr,now about other States, but I know that in Delhi, scooterd rivers and taxi 
drivers got so involved in the election that they closely followed the counting. 
It was a complicated system but they followed every measure and explained 
to the passengers in their vehicles how it worked. Our people are illiterate, 
uneducated, but when they are interested in a particular thing, they learn 
about it. 

Steady Recovery: Clear Direction 

: I would like to say a few words niyself. 

· P ~IMB MINISTER 
India's 
problems, as those of any other country, are conditioned by external and 
internat factors and in today's world there are not many options open. 
do not want to dwell on the past. But we must re1nember how the situation 
had deteriorated before my Government took over, whether in the country 
or in.the international sphere. There was tbe galloping fuel crisis, the cold 
war,.the revensal of detente, arms build-up, militarization in our neighbour-
hood, big power confrontation, inflation, 
the slowing of the dialogue 
between North and South and restrictive trade barriers. All these remain 
as a legacy. We now have an armed conflict between Iran and Iraq. 

Internally, divisive forces had grown; so had communalism and casteism 
which we thought we had controlled. · But they have reared their ugly heads 
again. There was denigration of higher education, of institutes of higher 
learning, as well as of people like scientists, and so on. Prices were steadily 
gomg up. 

I must say I am rather astonished that some people insist on using words. 
like "drift" or ''non-performance" with regard to my Government. They 
are not very original in this. This is what we used to say, with good cause 
about the Jauata Party and Lok Dal Governments. Perhaps, it is wishful 
thinking on the part of these people, or, may be just a case of non-seeing 
press commentators. 

Excerpts from a Press conference at New Delhi, October 21, 1980 

The administration is recovering fast from the coma into which it had 
settled during the Janata Party and Lok Dal Governments. Today, the 
direction is clear. The Plan bas been :finalised in. record time, with the 
biggest ever allocation of funds, with right prim ities and very clear priorities. 
Production in agriculture and industry has increased. The index of 
industrial production is steadily going up since April. Decisions have been 
taken n1uch faster than at any time before to improve production and 
distribution and on investment. The licensing has been doubled because 
of the simplification of procedures. The Janata Party's and the Lok Dal's 
utter failure to make forward investments had led to a run down condition 
of the infrastructure. This has now naturally improved a great deal. I 
am not going into any details. 

I am just mentioning certain points. 

The law and order is slightly better, though far from satisfactory. 

should like to congratulate and to thank all those who worked so hard 
to maintain peace in the last days which, as you know, everybody had 
prophesied would be rather difficult for us since various festivals were coming 
so close together. But there has been peace all aro:und, and especially in 
· Delhi, it was a very impi0essive Id prayer .. And this is due to the efforts · 
of non-official individuals as well as groups, who worked practically round 
the clock, to see that people's fears and suspicions were dispelled. On 
the other hand, there are some who seem determined to provoke anger .. 
· And this is the problem in any such situation, that if you want people to 
exhibit their anger, it is bound to have a reaction on the other community, 
and this is how a situation deteriorates. 

Ivfuch has still to be done with regard to communal feelings. 

It is not 
a short-term problem. 
It is a problem that exists not only in India but in 
many countries; either it 1s communal or it is racist or it has lir-guistic 
undertones. But in India, we have been, by and large, able to handle it 
- and to assure our minorities of a better deal. 

Of course, when something like Moradabad happens, it reopens old 
wounds and, therefore, this is v~y important that people should not indulge 
in n1ere blaming. Of course, those who are guilty must be punished, there 
is no doubt about it. But the first task is to create an atmosphere of trust 
and confidence. While security forces have to be very active and alert, 
and they have done a good job-with some exceptions-basically, it is the 
neighbours who have to be protective. 
In Moradabad itself, there are many 
instances of Muslims saving Hindu shops or people and vice versa. The 
security and integrity of the country must be made secure, secessionist and 
comn1unal tendencies controlled and acts of sabotage dealt with :firmly. 

An item that has largely missed our Press is the remarkable work that 
was done and the success that was achieved in dealing with one of the most 
severe droughts that this country has ever faced. Some of the drought 
is still there. But that we were able to tide over this period without any 
is quite an achievement. We 
deaths, without having to import food, 

also had very severe floods, especially in U.P. And I might say about the 
drought that the entire responsibility of it was borne by the Centre because, 
at that time; most of the States were under the Presidential Rule. Then 
we had floods in U.P. Peopl_e have come to me, from all sections, whether 
they are the poor or the middle class, not necessarily political people, and 
they have been full of praise for the manner in which the U.P. government 
had dealt with it and gave relief and helped supplies to get there. 

I am acutely aware that some prices are high and the main culprits 
are sugar, gur, petroleum and its products. Our policy in 1976-77 had 
enabled sugar production to go up to 64.6 lakh tonnes in 1977-78. But, 
thanks to the next Governments of the Jana ta and the Lok Dal, it came 
down to 38 lakh tonnes in 1979-80. Now, this is one of the main reasons 
why we have the shortage of sugar today. 

This year the crop will be better and I am told that. the rate of inflation 
has slowed down. Our food and agricultural production outlook is good. Coal 
and power have shown improvement. In industry, the legacy of the Janata 
Party was. a. significant decline 1n steel, . cement and coal. · Now, there has . 
been a pick up in 1ndustrial production. It began in Apritand since August 
it is firming up, es.pecially in aluminium; copper; newsprint. even in pig iron, 
saleable steel, phosphatic fertilizers and some other items. I am sorry that· 
tbe Railways have not come up yet as they should. But they are struggling 
to improve and we are at it-pushing them and keeping in constant touch 
with the situation. When we took over, 18,000 wagons were on the sick 
list. The health of the industry is judged by the machine-building industry 
and capital goods industry largely, and in these areas there is progress. 
Port congestion has disappeared. So, overall, thei:e is an integrated picture 
which has emerged. 

l saw some comments, for instance, in this morning's papers about one 
of our Ministers being lack-lustre. Now, I would like to know what was 
the brilliance of the previous Ministers in the Janata Government. The 
instance is before ml°right now; because there was so much brilliance and 
prestige that they had come to the conclusion that they could not win a seat 
on the UNESCO Executive Board and, therefore, we should not stand for 
it. Now, we did stand for it and largely thanks to the efforts of the then 
Education Minister, Shri Shankaranand, that we got the highest number 
of votes. It is only one example and one can go through many other things 
that are being done in this field and in other fields. 

There is no doubt that in international prestige there has been a very 
notable change and it is nonsense to speak of isolation. By the way; we are 
not afraid of isolation. 
is nothing 
wrong in being isolated and there is nothing right in going along with those 
who are taking a wrong decision and who are going in the wrong direction. 
The very fact that people, in spite of what you call or some people call 
'isolation', are still coming to India for solutions, are still anxious to·know 

If we take the right decision, 

there 

DEMOCRACY AND NAT~ONAL STRENGTH 

what we think, and not only that, many have changed their policies because 
of our attitude, I think, is a good enough certificate for us. We have 
always done and we shall continue to do what we consider is right and is 
in the nation's interest and in the interest of world peace. Perceptiol'ls and 
policies have always differed and they are bound to differ. We try to take 
a far-sighted global perspective in all that we do. Our voice is for sanity 
and peace and for human progress in a system of new economic order. 
India's position is well recognized. 
I think that now we can start off with 
questions .... 

QUESTION : Will it not be advisable to ban all communal parties contesting 
elections to any. public bodies and also nominating their representatives 
to any official or semi-official bodies? Further, I\1adam, is it not a fact that 
the Government is seriously considering a proposal to ban all such organi-
zations and newspapers who are engaged in communal hatred and anti-
national activities? 

PRI.ME MINISTER : I do not know whether banning will solve the problem. 
If the banning of such organizations would solve the problem, we could 
consider it. But I have my doubts about it. We have to meet it politically 
and socially, and, we have to involve the largest.number of the people in it. · 
I am convinced and it is being proved even during times of tension and 
rioting that the majority of people are not for such tensions. They do help 
It is a 
the people of other communities. So, it is a matter of education. 
I think that is re.ally the only way out. So far as news-
long-term thing. 
papers are concerned, I have said many times that there is the Press Council. 
It is for the newspaper community itself to look into such'problems and to 
see what should be done about them. It is not. otJ.ly a question of communal 
disturbances but even when there are other movements, whether of language 
or other things, it is the duty of the newspaper world to give guidance instead 
of.trying to provoke passions or writing thiugs which will aggravate the 
situation and result in greater violence, loss of life and so on. 

QuEsTtON : Right or wrong, the minority has looked at you personally, as 
well as to the Party, as its saviours. 
It was rather disappointing this time 
when three Central Ministers discovered foreign inspiration, foreign funds 
and foreign instigations. Now, recently when you were in Moradabad, 
you talked of a plot. How do you reconcile to these somewhat contradic-
tory statements? 

PRIME MiNISTBR : You said that Ministers have discovered foreign funds, is 
that the word you used? 

QUESTION : Mr. Zail Singh, Mr. Vasant Sathe, Mr. Yogendra Makwana 

have spoken of·all sorts of foreign inspiration and suspected funds and 
instigation. 

~RIME MINISTER : I don't think that anybody said it in that categorical 
manner, but there is no doubt that there is foreign interference at such a 
It does not mean that you can put your finger exactly on the spot, 
moment. 
it does not mean that our people are necessarily taken in by it, but there is 
effort from outside to exploit the situations, not only communal but other 
situations also. We know how it was tried to destabilise this whole area, 
this whole region. 

QUESTION : Madam, during Janata regime, there were a lot of communal 
disturbances, and I believe that U. P. Government instituted some inquiry 
into the Aligarh incident. But when you came to power that inquiry 
commission was actually wound up. Could you just tell n1e about the 
allegation by the Opposition leaders that the people, who were involved in 
the riots, had some connection with the Congress (I)? 
PRIME MINISTER . : w elf, I .· don't .• think that is. at an true. . If ever. we 
discovered any such connection, we have always taken very strong action. · 
But at that moment, you will probably recall, anything wrong that happened 
was attributed not just to the Congress, but to me personally. 

QUESTION : You talked earlier in your statement about secessionist trends in 
the country. 
I presume you meant the Assam situation and the agitation 
there. Do you visualize any early settlement of the issue because all ofus 
are disappointed as the last talks have ended in a stalemate? 

PRIME MINISTER : Have we finished with communal question? 

QUESTION: No. There are press reports that foreign money is being used 
for the purpose other than for which it was received. Are the Government 
of India thinking to put a check on it? Do you think some foreign money 
played hand in the riots? 

PRIME MINISTER : This question was indirectly asked just now. 
I do not 
think any foreign money had any direct hand. People tried to make much 
of the fact that there are some educational 
institutions coming up in 
Moradabad, but there is no reason to believe that there was any connection 
between them and the riots. Also, I think that some of this talk was a very 
mischievous suggestion to try and create division between us and our Arab 
friends who have consistently stood by us. 

QUESTION : The concern which you showed to visit Narainpur and Belchi 
was not there in respect of Moradabad, because you visited it after two 
months of the incident. Why this? 

PRIME MINISTER : I have spoken about this publicly. The situation, when 
there is communal riot, is quite different, because that is something that 
grows rather than comes down immediately. On every occasion, whether 
I have been Prime Minister or even when I was not, the administration 
always feels that such visits specially of somebody in Government may add 
to tension, because people come, they tell you their stories and their whole 
memories are revived, and if large number of people collect, anything may 
I wanted 
happen. They have. always been telling this-even previously. 
to go from the very first moment, but I certainly did not want to be in a 
position where, if something happens, they may say : ''Well, we told you 
not to come and you came, that is why this has happened". That was 
the reason. 

QUESTION : Is there a kind of conspiracy because, by and large, people are 
living in peace in our villages; and these incidents are taking place only in 
particular cities and quite often on particular days which are important days 
either nationally. or reEgiously? 

·. PR,ME MINISTER : Well, there is some trutli in .this that today there are 
con1munal minded people who like to incite such things. But this time, 
there has been a pattern. Whether this is Moradabad or any other city, 
it has not started basically as a communal thing. The effort was to turn a 
section of the people against 
the Government and against the police 
specifically, since the police-an arm of the government-i::. nearest to the 
people; but when there is this kind of tension present, it is not unlikely that 
it may take a communal tum. Now, this has happened not only with 
Musli1~s, this has been with tli.e Harijans. There has been an effort to have 
friction between different sections in other places also and, as I said earlier, 
we have to deal with such people and the manner in which afterwards people 
try to exploit the situation. For instance, I).otbing was happening in Delhi 
until the people were asked to wear black badges. Now, that provoked the 
other people and created tbe ,situation. Obviously, the person who said 
that this is continuing, some people are still having movement which is 
bound to aggravate one community or the other. This is happening on 
both sides, not just on one side. It could not happen suddenly. Also, in 
the communal thing, it is ve1y surprising that the sarr1e sort of incident took 
place simultaneously in different cities. That is what gives credence that 
there was someone behind it. 

Now we finish with 'Communalism'. 
Now with Assam, I think so much has been written about it, you are 
aware of the background and of the Government's attitude. T personally 
have been very close to Assam and that region for a very long time-since 
1955. As a member Qf the Working Committee, I was in charge of the 
elections and other organisational matters there. I am fully aware of the 

problems of those who had come from outside. Now, this problem is not 
unique to Assam but also to Punjab, Delhi, U.P., West Bengal, all these 
places. There is some historic reason, due to Partition and so on, that this 
kind of influx took place from outside. The basic thing is: being economi-
cally more backward than places like West Bengal and Maharashtra. The 
hilly areas specially are more backward because of lack of communications. 
it is of employment or 
The difficulties which all India faces, whether 
indu&trialization; all these are aggravated in such areas. Now, this is the 
basic problem. 

that time 

Up to now, the Assamese have not taken it up. 

In fact, it was the 
Central Government which was trying to find out who have come, I mean, 
refugees or whatever it is; and some of these people were sent out. Some 
returned but were sent out again. But it was suddenly, about a year ago, 
that this movement came up. Now, it was already several months old 
when our Government came, and, by 
it had spread 
considerably. 
.. Then I made a propos\ll-. which to i:ne stUl seems very reasonable-. that 
. while we are talking, why don't we start the work of identifying those,. 
because there is no controversy on any side about those who came after 
1971. That is why I said 1971 was not the cut-off date but the date from 
which work could be started. Work cannot be suddenly started from 
a date which is very far back. We have to start and then, if necessary, go 
further back. But somehow they (agitators) have not ag1eed. 
The 
strange thing is, they do agree at the meeting here, but either when they go 
back to Assam or to the Assam House here, they often change. Sometimes, 
people of other parties have entered into it and have assured that this is the 
minimum, this we have agreed to. And when we have shown our inclina-
tion to agree, we have found that they are not agreeing to it. 

Now, we have a problem. 

I do not say that all the people in the 
movement are secessionist or sepitratist. They are not. But there ,s a very 
small group, perhaps a group or just a few individuals, who are. But a 
movement like this does give encouragement to these anti-social forces. 
This is the problem. 
I do not think the students especially wanted any kind 
of violence; but violence )las taken place all the time. And the suspicion 
did start and really there was fear, almost amounting to panic, in the minds 
of different people, not of just one religion, but of different religions who 
have come from other parts or who have been living there for a very long 
time-I mean, even their parents. Because when we tried to identify, we 
discovered that most of these people whom they were trying to throw out 
were full Indian citizens. 

So, we have a responsibility, from the historic and from the human 
points of view, with regard to the people who live there. Those who have 
to be sent out, well, certainly we have to identify them. But our fear is that 
in this process, there will be great harassment even to Indian citizens. 

DEMOCRACY AND NAnONAL STRENGTH 

There is one suggestion which they made that a large number of people 
should be declared stateless. This is just not possible. You cannot have 
people in your country if they are not citizens of India. 
It means, they 
have no responsibility towards India, and we have neither any obligation 
nor any right to ask them to do anything. No country can tolerate such a 
situation. This problem is a much bigger one. Talks have not broken 
down; but it is a see-saw type of thing. Every now and then we feel that 
an agreement has been reached, but it is not reached. We shall keep on 
pursuing and I do feel that the people of Assam have suffered already a great 
deal because of this. Students have lost a whole year of their schools and 
colleges. The labourers have lost a lot of money. And, it has stopped all 
programmes. We made very special programmes for the North-east for 
economic development and none of it can begin while this is going on. So, 
now we have decided that whether they agree or not, we will go on 
with our programmes which are all for their benefit and what they · 

· · . themselves ·want. 

QUESTION : There is a proposal that there should be a s~parate Ministry 
·under you to look after the North-eastern region. Soon after that proposal 
was made, Mr Makwana made a statement in Patna saying that this will 
not be accepted. What are your views ? 

·PRIME MINISTER : The point is, will it help to have a Ministry under me? 
Well, I don't know. This has to be looked into. The Home Ministry is 
the one which does all this work. 
If there is a Ministry under somebody 
else, then the question of co-ordination and so on becomes more difficult 
and it takes more time. We are seeing that one person should be in charge 
of this and pay very special attention. We have also made . groups 
of Ministers. 
In my previous regime, we had done this for Kashrr&r, that 
all the Ministers concerned with any programme would sit together so 
that no programme would be held up. So, that sort of thing we are doing 
for that area. 

QUESTION : In the case of people who have come from West Pakistan and 
who are now residing in Kashmir, there is a kind of practice that they 
exercise their franchise for the Lok Sabha elections but not for the Assembly 
elections. 
In the case of Assam, the concerned number is about one million 
or one and a half million. 
Is it possible to have an arrangement under 
which they will vote for the Indian Parliament and may not vote for the 
Assam Assembly, because the essential grievance is that the refugees who are 
coming will give a certain direction to political events in that State? 

PRIME MIN~STER : Well, first, no more refugees are coming. Secondly, the 
number depends on from what date you start looking at it 
I don't think 
that it is at all as high as you have put it. 
I think this kind of voting, voting 

for one thing and not for another, also has its dangers. And I don't think 
the Assamese have agreed to any such proposal. 

QUESTION 
: This is also in connection with the Assam problem. Will 
your Government consider using the National Security Ordinance to break 
the blockade of crude and plywood? 

PRIME MINISTER : Well, we have not got to that yet. Since you are talking 
about the Ordinance, I must say that there is a lot of usual exaggeration 
It is n1e.rely to deal with 
and distortion that has been written about it. 
antisocial elements-of course, if there is anything secessionist, then that 
comes under it. So far, there have been about 18 arrests in Delhi and less 
than a hundred all over India. 

QUESTION : :But the Chief Minister of U.P. has said that 700 liaye been 
. arrested under the Ordinance. 

PRIME MINISTER : Well, this is the figure I have been given. 
if you like. 

I will check it 

QUESTION : The Home fvrinister said a few days ago that some vested 
interests are behind the agitationists and that is why these talks are not 
coming to fruition. Though the agitationists resent these remarks very 
much, l would like to know, can you specify the vested interests? 

PRIME MINISTER : Well, why should I make them feel 1nore resentment'! 

QUESTION : Madam, throughout th.e North-east there is a":psychological gap 
betwe_en the people living there and the people in the rest or India, politically, 
socially and otherwise. For instance, in Manipur, it has taken a bizarre 
turn; 
the Hindu names. 
Whatever the reasons, they do not consider themselves part of the national 
mainstream. It has begun to happen even in Assam where national parties 
have taken roots. Don't you think this is the crux of the problem? 

they even go to the extent of renouncing all 

PRIME MINISTER : Well, the problem in different States is different_ The 
Assam problem is not the same as in Manipur or Tripura or Nagaland or 
Mizoram. So far as Nagaland and Mizoram are concerned, we had a lot 
of trouble earlier also. But I think that trend is now reversed. They are 
thinking of themselves as Indians and, by and large, the situation is peaceful. 
Certainly, it is much better than when I first became the Prime Minister. 

QUESTION :, I think the Government is aware that millions ,vill be affected if 
they are asked to go. 

· DEMOCRACY AND NAT~ONAL STRENGTH 

PRIME MINISTER : It is not millions. 

It is in thousands, 

QUEST~ON : I presume they will mostly go to Bangladesh. 

PRIME MINISTER : Well, unless they go to some other country. 

QUESTION : Have youraised this matter with the President of Bangladesh? 

PRIME MINISTER : Not formally. But I think he is aware of the situation. 

QUESTION : How many thousands, would you say? 

PRIME MIN~STER : I do not have the very exact figures. We have only a 
It is only after identification starts, which we have not been 
rough idea of it. 
allowed to do by the agitators, that we can assess the situation fully. 

QUESTION : I would like to put two questions: Of course, they are ncit 
connected. One is about the Nirankari Baba's murder. That is a larger 
question.. Now, you have given an overall picture of India's economy and 
polity. There are some people who believe that certain structural changes 
are necessary to give a further push to the system. Do you think that you 
will be able to carry out your election manifesto within the existing system? 

PRIME MINISTER : I think so. Yes, we need to analyse the whole system and 
we certainly need to take a look at certain rules which succeed in delaying. 
For instance, over they ears, I find that for having a solution, we tend to 
form another committee, and each committee becomes one more sort of step 
between what we want to do and, I ~an, what our problem is and how to 
achieve it. So far as the other question is concerned, 
it is a dastardly 
murder and it should be dealt with as such. 

QUBST~ON : One of the Chief Ministers of the Congress (I) States has said 
-that democracy has failed in this country, and that there must be a 
Presidential form of Government. What is your opinion? 

PRIME MINISTER: Now, many of the countries, which have Presidential forms, 
consider themselves democracies also. 

QUESTION : What about the earlier part? One of your Chief Ministers is 
saying that democracy has failed. 

PRIME M{NISTER : I don't know whether he has said it or not, because quite 
often people are quoted out of context and, quite often, they have not said 
at all what they are supposed to have said. But my own views on this have 

been made clear many times. And I agree with Winston Churchill that 
democracy is the most fragile of systems, but there is not any better. Now, 
it is full of faults and difficulties. But which system is not? But, for 
demqctacy to work, for every system to work, you have to have people 
following the norms. For example, if some people say, "We are not going 
to follow this", what will happen? The simplest example is the rule of the 
road. We are going to keep to the left. But if some people say, "I am a 
free person and I am going to keep to the right", what is going to happen? 
So, it is the same thing. 
In a democracy, the Government has an obligation 
to allow the opposition to function, to have a free Press and a peaceful 
administration, and that sort of thing. But the opposition also has a 
responsibility to allow an elected government to function. But if they 
are going to obstruct from the very beginning, then, obviously the things 
that the people wanted, that is, . the 
implementation of the declared 
programmes, are much more difficult. 

QUEsT~ON · :· What has happ~ned suddenly last week that the Government 
· had thought it fit to promulgate an ordinance taking· over the Maruti 
Company? What is the purpose of this? There are large debts and the 
Government has thought it fit to use the public money to pay off the debts. 
Would you please enlighten us? 

PR~MB M~NISTER : Certainly I will. 
I think it is a very clear picture. Here 
is a project which has more· assets than liabilities, and it is something that 
can be used for the national good. And, it did not happen suddenly. You 
may remember that during my previous regime this was one of the very loud 
vocal demands of the Opposition that it should be nationalized. 

QUESTION : What do you intend to manufacture? 

PRIME M,NisTER : Well,. some kind of automobiles. 

It will be decided. 

QUESTION : What kind? 

PRIME MINISTER : It depends on needs. 
so on. 

It depends on what we export and 

QUESTION : What about the small car project? 

PRIME MlNlSTER : Well, I do not know whether that design will be taken or 
not. This is for the Ministry of Industry to decide. As I have said, they 
have to go into the whole picture : what our needs are, the priority they want 
to give to the small car and whether we should concentrate on exports or on 
other vehicles. 

QUEST:t;ON : There is a need for small car and the prices are going up so fast 
that the common man cannot afford one. 

PR(ME MINISTER : This is what I am saying. This whole thing is to be gone 
into by the Industry Minister. 

QUEST~ON : Madam Prime Minister, because of the spreading of education 
and because of the socio-economic reasons, the young men want work and 
when they do not find it, then, the theory of the 'sons of the soil' comes in. 
Secondly, I want to know whether it is true that there is a feeling among the 
younger people that the Youth Congress; the younger generation, is being 
ignored. 

Is it true ? 

P~ME M~NISTER : I do not thiuk that any country or any government can 
afford to ignore its youth forces. . They are the future. Even if we want to 
ignore them, they just do not get ignored.· There is.no·question of ignoring · 
them. ·. Unemployment is a very serious problem, not only for us. but even • · 
for many of the afiluerit countries as well. We had initiated many program-
mes, but it is not a problem that· can be solved overnight. My personal 
view is that we still have to make a great deal of effort. The changes that 
we had made in the educational system were riot properly implemented, 
which would help people to get jobs. Then, we have to have a balance; how 
much the government can interfere. I am not for governmental interference. 
On the other hand, there has to be some machinery which finds out what 
jobs are available. So, unless there is some kind of balance between the 
two, we will have trouble. That is why we have been laying stress on 
vocational guidance and vocational training in such matters. 

QUESTION : Madam Prime Minister, the Afghan President, MlS Karmal was 
in Moscow and there was a talk about the situation in Afghanistan and 
the Indian stand on the Afghanistan issue. Any clarification? 

PR~ME M~NISTBR : Well, my stand is exactly what it was before and nothing 
has changed very much. We have said that we do not approve of foreign 
troops or any other type of interference in any country. This has been 
our stand always and it remains our stand. The other thing is how to deal 
with it, whether shouting about it is going to force the troops out or whether 
other initiatives could be taken? 

QUESTION : There is some talk about India co-ordinating its planning with 
the Soviet FJy~.year Plan. 

In what areas is this expected to be? 

PRIME M~NISTBR : Well, it is not really a question of co-ordinating as such. 
But if we buy something from the Soviet Union, they have to fit it into their 

Five Year Plan, and that is why if they do not have some advance idea of 
what we are likely to want, we are not likely to get it. 

QUESTION : Madam Prime Minister, will you attempt to revise the Family 
Planning Programme, and how important is it to you? 

PRIME MINISTER : Family Planning is an important programme for any 
country which has such a fast increasing population; and the better our 
It is not so much a 
health services are, the bigger becomes this problem. 
question of the birth rate. 
Ii is a matter of reaching the people and 
convincing them; becaiise my experience is that vast majority of women are 
for it. Unfortunately, there was a lot of wrong propaganda done about 
forcible sterilization. There was some, but nothing like the scale that was 
publicised. The people here were told that every single man, woman and 
child was going to be sterilized. This created. panic amongst the people 
against the programme. But, even before we were not for coercion, and now 
also we are not for any kind of compulsion. 
I think we should educate 
people that theidea. is not just to have small population; the major idea 
behind the programme is to have a healthier fan1ily, a family where the 
parents can give the children their rights. The child should not be 
considered just as a pair of hands, but as an individual who has certain 
rights, and as he grows up, certain responsibilities. Besides, it should be a 
matter of choice for the woman also : how many children she wants to 
bear. She has a double responsibility because the average woman here has 
the burden of child-bearing or looking after the child and, at the san1e 
time, do field work or other work. 

QUESTION : Madam Prime Minister, would yo:;1 be pleased to say what is 
your assessment about the latest situation in I'ran and Iraq; and, whether 
in response to the suggestion made by the Iraqi envoy, special emissary, 
who came and requested you to mediate in the dispute, would you like to 
share with us what is the situation like? 

PRIME MIN1STER : I think all of you are aware of the number of attempts 
or mediation attempts which have been made and so far none of them has 
got a move on. We are in touch with both sides, but I do not think that 
anything very positive is immediately possible. There are some indications 
of softening, but it is difficult to say, it is a very fluid situation. But, we 
are deeply unhappy over the conilict because both countries are good friends 
of ours. 

QUESPON : Madam Prime Minister, we can take for granted from you 
directly that you like the idea of Winston Churchill about democracy and 
that you are satisfied with the present democratic set up in India, and tl;tat 

you do not see the necessity to change the present set up into one like, let us 
say, the French system? 

P~ MINISTER : Are you asking or telling something? What I said was 
It is a 
that every system has some advantages and some disadvantages. 
question of balancing them. We have to ask the French how it is working 
in France. 
I might tell you, recently I have received letters from many 
countries, of peope there, who were dissatisfied with their systems-and 
they are den1ocracies-and ask for exchange of views on this question. 

QUESTION : I switch over to the prices. When you took over in January, 
the price situation was bad. But, it is worse today with the wholesale price 
index having gone up by 40 points. You promised in your manifesto that 
you would try to bring down prices. Can you assure the country by what 
time you will be able to do this ? 

PRilvJE MINISTER : No. This was the Janata practice thatevery now and then 
we heardthat prices win be down in two· months or iri three months and . 
this will be done, but it was never done. 
I do not propose to follow that 
I may tell you 
practice at all. We are trying our best to control them. 
that the rate of inflation has come down. As I said 
in my opening 
remarks, the major culprits are the petroleum products, sugar and gur. 
Sugar has a good reason because last year's production was so limited. 
This year, we hope, we are going to do better in that area. Some prices 
simply cannot be controlled, I mean all those connected with petroleum, 
but other things partly, of comse. 
In today's world, prices are going up 
and India cannot be separated from it. Other countries are trying to see 
that the other situation meets up with the prices so that people are not 
squeezed. Some prices can come down with better production, and, that 
is why all our stress is on producing goods and seeing that they reach the 
people. with better distribution system. That is the real answer to it. 

QUESTION : It is said the previous Prime Minister of Lok Dal took crores of 
rupees from the Sugar Industry and allowed them to raise their prices as 
much as they could. How much of it is true ? 

PRIME MINISTER : I think somebody from his own Party has said so. 

QUESTION : In today's morning papers, we read that Russia, a good 
neighbour and a super power, has started a war on 'Vodka'. So, may I 
know whether our country can also start such a war? 

PRIME MINISTER : I thought some new country had been born; I had not 
I am all for that war. Let me tell you I do not believe 
heard of it before. 
in the way prohibition was managed here. 
I am against people drinking, 
and I think they should be persuaded. 

QUBSnoN : Madam, I would like to seek your clarification on the relations 
between India and the United States, particularly President Carter's 
Administration had despatched the enriched uranium to India and also the 
problem regarding countervailing duties, which is being amicably settled. 
I would very much like you to comment whether, in view of the despatch 
of enriched uranium, we are going to have better relations with the U.S. in 
future or, if not; whether we will get into trouble again with regard to these 
agreements? 

~ME M~~STER : We are trying to base our relations not on anything that is 
happening at the moment, but in the overall context. Therefore, we have 
tried for friendship with America very consistently all along and we still 
pursue that policy. We think, regardless of a country's system or what 
they are trying to do there, we should be friends with such an important 
nation. as the United States. Unfortunately, it is their administration which 
· always has a tilt against us. 
We are glad that this first instalment 1S coining, but, still we have to see · 
what happens to the second instalment. But it does not affect our attitude 
because, as you know, even at the worst period of animosity between China 
and ourselves, India was one of the very few countrie5 which was supporting 
China's entry into the United Nations, and, all the West at that time was 
blaming us for that. 

QUESTION : Would you say that there has been a set-back in the bilateral 
relations with Pakistan? 

Pru:ME MimSTBR : Well, it is unfortunate that President Zia has gone against 
the letter and spirit of the Simla Agreement in raising Kashmir (issue) and, 
when we had the troubie in Moradabad; by trying to make it a major 
international issue. Such things do not help relations between nations; 
especially, it had a big effect on our own people here. 

QUESTION : In this connection, the general question all over the world is that 
Pakistan is going to explode a nuclear device in three years' time. If it 
happens, do you think the Government of India will revise its policy of using 
nuclear power for peaceful purposes? 

PR~ME MtN~STBR : President Zia keeps on denying it. Shall we take his word 
for it or not? 

QUESTION : You have to decide it. 

Pru:ME MINISTER : We have already. Our _policy with regard to nuclear 
weapons is very clear. We do not think that they (nuclear weapons) will 
help in any way. 

QUESTION : Do you take his words for it? 

PRIME MINISTER : I do not think I like saying that someone is not telling 
the truth. We will leave it at that. 

QUESTION 

: (Inaudible) 

PRIME MINISTER : What poses a threat is the greater involvement of all the 
powers in the Indian Ocean and in the region, because the thing did not 
suddenly begin or the threat did not begin from the Soviet troops' entry into 
it. For instance, long before that, there was a lot of activity in the Indian 
Ocean and there was Western activity in various other countries, and at that 
time also, we thought that this would lead to further involvement of others 
It is a kind of escalation. If someone 
as well. This is what is happening. 
enters an area, somebody feels that he has also to enter it. 

. · QUESTION : Mrs. :Bandaranaike and the situation in Sri Lanka? 

PRiME I\1INISTER : It js not a question of an individual. But I must say that 
I am deeply distressed at this-trying to take away political rights or voting 
I think some newspaper came out that she would not even be 
rights. 
allowed to address meetings, and I believe that earlier her nephew, who used 
to be Finance Minister, Mr. Felix Bandaranaike, was deprived of his civil 
rights in the sense that he could not vote in the local election. 
I think this 
is very bad. She and her family have been facing a lot of harassment. 

QUESTlON . The latest Cabinet reshuffle has been criticised on two counts. 
First, you have not thrown out the dead wood. Secondly, you have not 
inducted a lot of talent in the Cabinet. And thirdly, why did you select the 
Dussehra day for the reshuffle and new entries? _ 

PRiME MINISTER. : Well, is it notjust a matter of opinion? Obviously, if I 
thought they were dead wood or not talented; I would not have taken them. 

QUESTION : May I ask a question about the rural people? Thirty-three 
years after Independence, the rural scene is still, by and large, one of 
privation, ignorance, poverty, disease and all that. Don't you think it is 
high time to take some concrete steps to ameliorate their condition rather 
than give some spoon-feeding in the shape of 'Food for Work' and all that? 
I would suggest, for example, free dispensaries in the villages for every 1,000 
rural people. 

PRIME MINISTER : I think itis a very wrong perception to say that nothing 
I would not say that the rural scene has been 
has been done for rural India. 

transformed or that it is in any way satisfactory. But it has changed a lot 
. since Independence. 
I am one person who had been travelling consistently 
[ almost-three weeks in a month before I was Prime Minister and quite a good 
~bit afterwards, and I have seen the change come about. Many diseases 
~ have been eradicated. Where you saw malnutrition an1ongst children, it 
·has largely gone. In fact, in all tours I did not see a single child like that. 
They are better nourished obviously, because they looked healthier; their 
eyes are brighter. There are pockets of abject poverty, but overall 
I would say that people are better dressed. 

All the progranunes, whether health or education, are increasing, but 
the population is also increasing. You can't have everything both ways; 
don't have family planning but give more of this; don't do this, but do that. 
You see, unless everybody is willing to accept certain norms and disciplines, 
it is going to be very difficult, and that is the major difficulty. 

The other thing is that . the best of programmes, 

in 
. implementation does not yield the results that. one thought it would. yieid. 
What is wrong with our system is its ·rigidity.· · Once something· is. decided.• 
upon, it is very difficult to change it. And when you try to change it instead 
of simplifying, it becomes more complicated. We tried to decentralize. 
The whole idea of Panchayati Raj and so on was decentralization. But it 
did not quite work like that. But I think all these things take time. 

sometimes, 

Now, one thing which I was told was that in 1960 a prominent political 
person from here happened to be in the United Kingdom. And, there was 
a bye-election there and he decided to follow the candidate of the Conser-
vative Party who later won. But this area where he was going was an area 
where they did not have drinking water, where women had to go long 
distances with pails for getting drinking water. In 1960, they did not have 
electricity. So, I am not saying it is a good thing. 
I am just saying that we 
tend to criticise everything that is happening in India instead of seeing it in 
some perspective. We have to judge what is happening n9t by what is 
happening in the West or in the socialist countries or other places where 
compulsion is used, but by our own conditions. Where did we start? 
How had the British left us? For me, it is a miracle that in spite of all our 
diversities and fi.ssiparous tendencies, we had remained united; with all 
the backwardness, we are making progress; with all the faults in education, 
we are producing brilliant and talented young people. Try to look at it 
from a positive angle for a change. 

QUESTION : Mr Jyoti Basu has said that your economic policies have failed; 
so you have issued the Ordinance, and if these things go on, they will lead to 
authoritarianism. What do you say for this? 

PRIME MINISTER : Do you think any comment is necessary? What are we 
doing? What are Marxist policies? And what is he doing in West Bengal? 

Many of the things are not functioning because the Marxist Unions are not 
allowing them to function. 

QUESTION : Your book. 
than even Panditji got for his books. 

It is said that you are going to get more royalty 

PRIME MINISTER : I only wish it were true! I am glad that you asked this 
question, because I also meant to mention it at the beginning, but I forgot. 
You know that the book Eternal India has appeared under my name. 
wrote the text of the book in 1978. 
In 
I did not have anybody to help me. 
fact, there was not even a typist when I did it because I wrote it in Coorg and 
I took a few days off to go and do it there. But it was not supposed to be 
my book, but the book of the photographer. He had the photographs and 
he said, "You will have more time on hand .. Would you like to do this as 
a relaxation?" 
I just saw a few of the pictures and I liked them very much 
and T said I woulci. · The only difference was that his book was going to be . 
'.'A Hindu India":· .. I-said, ''I would not lik~ to do it for ''A Hindu India", 
because I saw India with its composite culture with many races and religions 
and so on; and if I am allowed to add some of them then I will do it. This 
is how it was done. 
I never had the whole of it because he had some 
pictures which he did not have before. As for royalty, I might as well give 
out the figure. Vlhen I sent the script, I got Rs. 5,000 and that is that, and 
I have no rights on it at all in any language, in any country. 

QUESTION : If you give your thought to the fact that industrial progress has 
slowed down in this country, you will find that one of the reasons is that coal 
output i& supposed to be the minimum as compared to many other countries;_ 
and, the machinery worth crores of rupees meant for modernizing the coaf 
industry is lying in th~ open. 

PRIME MINISTER : You asked aboutcoal. 
I do not know about the equip-
ment. But it is quite true that the coal industry has been in the doldrums. 
There are many reasons. Partly, it is that many of our private sector people 
do not, even when they are making good money, modernize, whether it is 
the coal mine or the factory. Suddenly you come to a situation where 
things are grave. This is what has happened with coal, and we find that it 
is not being looked after properly. Then 
that 
dislocated things. But I think production has improved and it is one of the 
things which we are following up with greater atte11tion. 

it was nationalized and 

QUESTION : You are quoted in a Consultative Committee meeting to have 
said "No" to colour TV, whereas the Minister for 
Information and 
Broadcasting. has repeatedly been saying that they will have colour TV. 

Would you like to give Government's policy whether a country like ours can 
afford colour TV and whether it is a priority sector? 

P.iqME MINISTER : It is a priority sector but in the world everything goes so 
fast that sometimes the question is not whether you can afford it, but, 
I am not saying that we are going in 
whether you can afford not to have it. 
for colour TV. 
Just now we have to pay attention to many other things. 
Everybody around us has colour TV and soon there will be no country left 
without colour TV and that will affect it economically because we won't 
be able to export and so on. That does not mean that we will take it up 
immediately. We have to improve our services and frankly, I think; we 
have to do very much for rural areas. What happens is that because town 
people are more vocal, even when a programme is started for a rural area, 
the town people, even the small town people, exert tremendous pressure 
on the local station to have a different type of programme. My own 
inclination is that we should concentrate on the rural areas, on problems 
of farmers, and, ifpossible, teaching and so on through it before we get on 
to the other things. But I do not think we can completely shut our minds· 
to the colour· TV. At the n:i.oment we have left it to our scientists. 

QUESTION : Madam Prime Minister, I want to ask a question about 
journalists. First, I want to know when is the Government taking a 
decision on the Palekar Committee's recommendations? Secondly, I 
want to point out that there is increasing attack on the Press. What has 
happened in Bangalore? One Journalist's wife was murdered in Orissa. 
Are you going to give proper protection to the journalists or not? 

PRIME M(N~STER : I am sorry for what happened to Mr. Mahapatra's wife. 
I believe action has been taken. 
I got the note just after I~ sat here. -Many 
have oeen arrested. 

QUESTION ; One Congress (I) man also. 

PRIME MIN~STER : The Congress (I) is blamed for everything. All sorts of 
people get into the Party. We do not always know who is who. They 
say nine persons have been arrested and one is absconding and officers have 
been suspended but the case is still under investigation. So far as the other 
report is concerned, I really do not know. 

It is under consideration. 

QUESTION : Some newspapers were seized by the Congress (I) workers in 
Madras. 

P~ME M~sTER : I am not in favour of newspapers being seized, or 
anything else for that matter, or any type of violence or rough handling. 

QUESTION : Madam, during your electioneering you had stated that one of 
your Cabinet colleagues had links with the CIA. Now ... 

PRIME MINISTER : No, no; no. It was not I who stated it. This came out 
either from the Janata Party or some American sources or something 
I have certainly · not said anything like this. This is how 
like that. 
misunderstandings arise. 
I have never said anything like this. I think 
it came out either in a talk or in an article, and then the people of the Janata 
Party or the Lok Dal took it up. 

QUESTION : It was the Lok Dal people. May I know what do you think of 
the obsession of a large part of your Party to put the future of your country 
in the hands of your son, Rajiv, who honestly concedes that he is not fit for 
the job? 

PRIME MINISTER : Well, firstly there is .no proposal to put the future of the 
. country in his hands. Nobody has made such a . proposal. The. only . 
. proposal is that he should come and help ine in some way and it does not 
mean that he is .going to handle the future of the country. Whether 
somebody is capable or not, he can prove once he takes up the job. 
do_n't think anybody can say beforehand who is capable of doing something 
and who is not. 

QUESTION : An impression has been created by the recent events in the 
Congress (!)-ruled States that the Chief Ministers are on probation; You 
are reported to have addressed the Congressmen in Maharashtra where 
you are reported to have said that let the Chief Ministers work at least for 
a year. 

!want to know whether you said that and in what context? 

~ME M~STER: The problem is not that they are on probation, but because 
some peopie, when they have one grievance or another, start criticizing 
from the first day. When the person is not in his position, even for a week, 
some people start saying he cannot do it. It was in that context that I said 
that you do not decide whether a person can do something unless he has 
a chance to, at least, try his hand. 

Now, this really was the last question. 

I have to thank you all very 
I think you were much milder than in any other Press Conferences 

much. 
I had. And I thank you for your courtesy. 

··- -· ·c·:: .. -,~--~'~-

Role of Lawyers 

I AM MOST 
impressed at the large number of eminent lawyers who 
are attending the Conference and I am told that many could not be 
accommodated. I welcome all of you and specially the distinguished jurists 
from abroad. 

Lawyers have played a significant role in the intellectual regeneration 
of our country and its march to political independence. Now that 
independence has to be strengthened and made real for the vast nun1bers 
who have long been deprived of their rights, we expect lawyers, who are 
eminently suited by their training to shoulder responsibilities in public life, 
to be in the forefront of this great endeavour. 

I was born and brought up in a city renowned, for. the high standards 
of its bar and its courts and for several _celebrated lawyers amongst whom 
was my grandfather whose achievements became· a· legend. · My father· 
was also trained for a career in law but he did not practise except in the 
early years before Jallianwala Bagh and again on the eve of freedom at the 
famous INA trial. Yet; I do think he personified the spirit of law-civilized, 
rational and responsible behaviour and an approach of earnest study and 
analysis to social problems. Our parliamentary institutions and our 
Constitution owe much to him and to qur other legal luminaries of the day. 
The names of many great lawyers were associated with our. freedom 
movement and in formulating our Constitution. On this occasion, I 
specially recall Dr. Ambedkar's contribution . 

. The role of the Opposition in a,, democracy is one of the two major 
topics before this conference. Parliamentary democracy cannot function 
without mutual respect of the Government in power and of the Opposition 
for 
their respective roles. The very foundation of parliamentary 
democracy is based on recognition by the Opposition of the right of the 
majority party, which has been voted to power, to govern the country for 
the term prescribed by the Constitution and to pursue 
its declared 
programmes. There have to be certain norms which would guide the 
conduct of the Opposition in parliamentary democracy. Conventions 
in this regard have been established in western democratic countries, and, 
it is time for this country also to debate and discover these precepts and 
conventions of the Constitution which should apply to the conduct of the 
Opposition in a parliamentary democracy. 

In our country, 

the Opposition parties unfortunately do not 
understand that they too have an obligation to preserve the system. They 

Inaugural speech at the AU India Conference of Lawyers, New Delhi, October 25, 1980 

DEMOCRACY AND NAT~ONAL STRENGTH 

have increasingly resorted to agitational politics. Hardly had the election 
results been announced in January this year when one senior leader remarked 
that Parliament was no longer relevant. And some parties set out to quarrel 
with the verdict of the electorate. Now, at a time of grave economic 
peril, largely due to their own negligence and partly to the global crises, 
there are deliberate confrontations on any pretext, strikes in essential services 
and sometime sheer vandalism like the attack on the car rally. The actions 
of several Opposition parties give the impression that they have little faith 
in elections and no real respect for parliamentary institutions. 
\Vill the 
induction of the politics of the street into the parliamentary system not 
weaken it? 

Democracy means that Government is chosen by the people and 
reflects their will, that changes of Government occur in an orderly manner 
as provided by the Constitution, and that there are opportunides for parties 
and groups to canvass their points of view with the people and to come to 
It is sometimes mooted that there can be de1nocracy only in a two-
power. 
party system. That would be correct if politics were · a game like. cricket .. 
or football; but politics is riot sport. It is a matter of a nation's survivai 
and growth. A nation's political system is a matter of historical evolution. 
Only a few nations· in the world have a two-party system. They are the 
exceptions. 
It will certainly not be correct. to consider them more 
democratic than others. The systems which are accepted as democratic 
by 
is 
necessary for a democracy to work is not the number of parties but that 
all important parties should subscribe to some basic ideals and accept some. 
basic objectives, not merely the freedom of the country. There must also 
be agreement with a decision of the legislature and the rejection of violence. 
Violence and democracy cannot co-exist. 

\Vestern world have many 

forms. What 

faces and 

the 

It is sometimes said to me, as it was to my father, that I must build 
the Opposition. But that was not the advice given to the Janata Party 
Government when I was in·· the Opposition. The Government did 
everything possible to crush me a11d my party as is being done in Sri Lanka 
today against Mrs. Bandaranaike and her party. This has neither been 
It is for the Opposition to build itself up not by 
nor is our intention. 
inflaming the passions and prejudices of different sections but by working 
for the welfare of the people and winning their trust. 

In recent times, the Opposition in India functioned with responsibility 
and dignity only when we, in the Congress, constituted the Opposition. 
We unhesitatingly accepted the judgement delivered by the electorate in 
1977 and continued our service to the people even though we were not in 
power and were being continuously threatened and harassed. We launched 
no extra-parliamentary agitations. 
In fact, it was those who were in power 
t~en who forgot their function as a government, neglected their duty to the 
people. 

The second topic before the Conference is to assess the various existing 
democratic systems. What, if any, are the flaws in ours and how can we 
correct them? What can be done to strengthen democracy and ensure 
political stability along with social change? 

No system is perfect. Human beings and institutions built by them are 
always a mixture of good and bad, of strength and weakness. Our effort 
must be a continuous one to reduce the weaknesses and consolidate the 
strong points in us. 

The same can be said about our legal system. We all agree that no 
one should be deemed guilty until he is so proved, that fair trial should be 
given to all, and, that legal aid should be within the reach of the weakest. 
Yet, the legal hindrances and mounting arrears continue to cause grave 
concern. The public is exasperated by the experience of some people to 
delay and deny justice. This is true of a legislature as well as the executive. 
A large number of people from all walks of life in different countries 
write to me. Many . are dissatisfied. with their own systems. The 
presidential form also has many varieties, and, nowhere is it more criticized 
. than within the United .States which has had to pay a high price for the · 
deadlocks that all too frequently occur between the executive and 
the 
legislature. France also has tried many combinations as a republic. 

So far, in our country, there has hardly been any debate on systems of 
government. Democracy demands a public that is knowledgeable and 
alert. We would like the people of India as a whole to take an interest. 
It is in that spirit that I welcome this discussion and this Conference. 

The items taken up by the Conference are of national interest. So, 
it was natural for it to attract a great deal of national attention. But, there 
has been needless controversy. We should not be surprised by the 
misrepresentation, and even onslaughts, by tliose who ·over the years have 
It is 
lost no opportunity of doing so on most other matters as well. 
astonishing that many who speak the loudest about democracy should 
shy away from any public debate and involvement of large numbers of 
It is a fashion to praise Athens for its democracy. But today, 
our people. 
ancient Athens would not be regarded as a model for den1ocracy for 
it 
denied votes to women and to serfs. Less than 20 per cent of its adult 
It is possible to have reservations about some 
population could vote. 
particular features of a system. Let us not forget that eminent men in 
India also had grave doubts about adult franchise. I refer, in particular, 
to Rajaji who nevertheless was a shining light of democracy. 

To a lay person like me, 

it seems that lawyers should concern 
themselves not only with the letter of the various statutes, but with the spirit 
of law as a whole. Laws are made to help people and society, surely not 
to be an obstruction to necessary changes specially in a .contemporary fast 
moving world. 

Hence, the first loyalty of lawyers should be to the task of discerning 
right from wrong and to what our people have long described as dharma. 
Dharma is that which upholds life and society. 
It is a network of duties 
and obligations. 
It is a silver and silken thread that binds those who 
recognize a common destiny as a people, as a nation, indeed, as one mankind. 
As our wise sages have observed dharma will protect us only if we protect it. 
I have pleasure in inaugurating the All India Conference of Lawyers 

and give it my best wishes for its deliberations. 

Dynamics of Social Justice 
YOUR SUBJECT, the "DynamiQs of Social Justice", is of abiding concern. 
to all societies. All over. the world; there is a growing concern about social · . 
justice in all its manifestations. This concern is not confined t.o any group 
of nations, any particular geographical area or political system. Social 
justice is inextricably linked with the wider principles of liberty and equality 
as well as personal and corporate rights and obligations envisaged in most 
constitutions. 

Social justice can be said to be the dominant theme of our own 
Constitution. Exploited as we were by a colonial system and prior to 
that by a feudal, hierarchical order not noted for its fairness, our 
Constitution took special care to protect our people from all · kinds of 
discrimination on grounds of race, religion, caste, creed or sex. 

In our ancient statutes, 

Our freedom movement was a fight not merely against foreign rule, 
but against our own inherited injustices. Yet it would be wrong to imagine 
that our .country lacked a conception of social justice or derived it from 
Western constitutional thought. 
there was a 
well-developed sense of mutual duties and rights to which even the king was 
subject. No one could place himself above dharma (right behaviour). 
While the individual had his rights, the welfare of the group as a whole came 
first. But the nature of the relationship between the individual and society 
in old days was very different from the present age of participatory 
It should not be forgotten that the demand 
democracy and mass politics. 
for social justice has acted as the main motivating force in the evolution of 
modem democracy and the emergence of representative governments. 

Discrimination, exploitation and oppression are not confined to 
relations among individuals and classes. These have characterized relations 
among States also, largely as the legacy of colonial history. The United 

Inaugural speech at a seminar on 'Dynamics of Social Justice', New Delhi, October 31,1980 

Nations and other related agencies have made several attempts to remedy 
inequalities among nations· and to promote wider co-operation and also 
a new: ·order founded on international social justice. 

Within national societies, different approaches have been adopted 
towards 
the realization of social justice. Some systems emphasize 
individual liberty; others, the community interest. Even though our own 
independence movement was non-violent, it was a revolutionary one. 
Our Constitution conferred rights on the 'people which might otherwise 
have taken long years of struggle to achieve, e.g., adult franchise, women's 
vote and the abolition of any nexus between property and political rights. 
Conscious of the discrimination to which some groups had for centuries 
been subjected, 
it was resolved to assure them representation in the 
legislatures and in employment Similarly, the inequalities between men 
and women in marriage and inheritance were corrected by reforming Hindu 
Law. My father considered this as one of his greatest achievements. 

Our Constitution and other laws uphold equality before the law. · They· 
have abolished untouchaoility and granted freedom from exploitation in 
unequivocal terms. They prohibit discrimination· and protect the weaker 
sections of our population. They stand for secularism and a social order 
for 
All these are essential 
con1ponents of social justice and community objectives. 

the promotion of the people's welfare. 

Constitutional pronouncements do not necessarily mean that the battle 
is won. Americans know that despite the noble proclamation that all men 
are equal, it took nearly two centuries to make white people take 
cognizance of the demand of the blacks to equal rights. 

Today, our task in India is to achieve the objeotives adumbrated in 
our Constitution. While legal instruments a1e important in fostering social 
justice, they cannot by themselves bring about social reformation. We 
need a climate of proper interaction among the people and the government 
to nurture and promote our declared social goals. 

The greatest enemieo. of such progress are those who foment communal 
disharmony and carry on violent agitations and separatist and sectarian 
movements. Government is fighting such divisive forces with determination. 
But official efforts need the support of citizens and professional leaders. 
The legal community, in particular, has responsibility to defend democratic 
institutions and to create public opinion against anti-social elements. 

Our system envisages total equality of respect and opportunity for the 
followers of all religions. This principle we call 'secularism'. Another 
It is a word with varying connotations in 
crucial objective is socialism. 
different countries. To us, it means that 
its 
responsibilities for the building of the economy, for the eradication of 
poverty and reduction of economic_ disparity. 

recognizes 

the State 

This 

invariably 

champions of market forces. These elements say that there 

involves legislation which may be repugnant to 
is too 

legislation in India and that most of it is inhibitive of growth. 
Unfortunately, there is some truth in this, but the criticism has to be balanced 
against the fact that the overwhelming majority in our country consists of 
fthe deprived and the dispossessed who look to the State for a helping hand 
rout of the quagn1ire. Hence, the tools of production cannot be. left 

I to the mercy of the profit motive of the few, but, must serve the general 

, national interest. 

Legislation today cannot remain limited to criminal and civil issues. 
It has to deal with a wide variety of economic questions, industrial and 
labour relations, personal laws, education; environmental protection and 
so on. Legislation has, therefore, become complex and voluminous. As 
Jawaharlal Nehru said, "Society is changing. 
If it does not adapt itself 
quickly enough there occurs a gap between the old functioning and the new 
developments in society due to technological and other changes. The rule 
of law must run close to the rule of life." 

In countries which have enjoyed the benefits of the industrial revolution 
for several decades and acclirimlated national weaith; the urge for social 
justice has been the fountainhead · of wide-ranging welfare legislation. 
However, here in India, we lack the resources to provide such welfare. 
Old age benefits or unemployment doles are still in rudimentary stages. 
The will and the motive are there, but the means are lacking. Political 
rights have grown up before the capacity to furn.I 
the 
demands of the more vocal, organized sections, it can only be at the cost of 
the weaker, inarticulate groups. 

If we meet 

them. 

Mahatma Gandhi taught us to judge every governmental decision, 
every policy or programme, from the point of view of the poorest and the 
weakest. The law as a whole should keep in mind nationally accepted social 
imperatives, rather than rest merely on principles and interpretations evolved 
in societies where mass poverty has been overcome. 

A major ideological battle has been raging in our country between those 
who swear only by the Fundamental Rights chapter of our Constitution and 
those who hold that legislationshould strive to fulfil the hopes held out in 
I should like to add that the common 
the Directive Principles chapter. 
man's faith in democracy in our country depends in large measure upon the 
manner and speed with which we can solve his economic problems. To 
him, the Constitution should be a charter for change rather than a bulwark 
of the status quo. 

Lawyers are pre-eminently suited to deal with complicated legal and 
constitutional questions. At the same time, it is not necessary or even 
desirable to go to the courts in all cases. Social justice, particularly in a 
developing country, requires easy, speedy and inexpensive legal remedies, 
without, in any way, impairing the impartiality of the judicial process. 

There is no conflict betwl:ien different modes of settling disputes, so long 
as they lead to a fair and just disposal of cases in accordance with the law. 

if • I 

' ' < t 

It is with this objective that our laws provide for a system of settlement of 
disputes through a number of special forums like administrative tribunals, 
statutory bodies, arbitral tribunals and conciliation machinery. More 
such bodies may have to be established. 

I hope this Seminar will bring forth useful and practical suggestions on 

the vital issues before it. 

Ayyankali: Symbol of Urge for Equality 
I HAVE MADE it a rule never to unveil statues: Basically, I am. against 
statues. and, although . requests have come to participate 
in · functions 
connected with the statuis of some of the high<est in our land, so far I have 
never gone to any, and yet I am here today. The reason is that I feel that 
Ayyankali' s ideas, and the work he did, are all iis relevant in our society today 
as they were in his time, so long ago. And also, that this work, these ideas 
and this person need to be much better known in other parts of the country. 
He is too big a person to be confined to Kerala. He is a dedicated son of 
India. Like others who have worked for the Harijans-Jyotiba Phule and 
Dr. A1nbedkar-Shri Ayyankali symbolises the urge for equality of our 
people who were earlier considered untouchables. 

Untouchability was the very darkest blot on our civilization. But for 
it, India would have been ·much greater than it was. 
I myself, during 1ny 
first visit to Kerala, I think it was in 1931 with my mother and father, 
experienced it in the sense that one of our partymen was a Harijan. But, 
we had no hesitation in declaring that he was a Brahmin and he went every-
where we went, temples and everywhere. The virulence of yntouchability 
was the fiercest in the South and in Kerala. Yet, to Kerala also goes the 
credit of throwing open the first temple to Harijans. 

The eradication of uritouchability was an integral part of our freedom 
movement, and you all know what a great stress Mahatma Gandhi laid on 
this. 
In fact, he regarded this as his life's real work. We believe, as he 
taught us, that freedom and equality are inseparable. There can be no true 
freedom without equality and no equality without freedom. 

It was the leaders; many leaders of the Scheduled Castes themselves, 
who took courage to attack this evil of untouchability. But the greatest 
push towards its removal was the result of combined effort of reformers, 
many of whom were not Harijans, like Gandhiji himself and Thakkar Bapa. 

Speech .;.t the unveiling of a statue of the Harijan leader, Shri Ayyanka!i, Trivandrum, 
November 10, 1980 

Liberation cannot be conferred by others. 
It has to come from within a 
person, from within a group and from within a nation. Shri Ayyankali 
proved this in his own life of incessant struggle. He ran the first school 
and organized the first struggle of the language. As expected, he took a 
leading part in the Vikkom Satyagraha, and we know that he enjoyed 
Gandhiji's trust. 

Many disabilities might have been removed in law, but it is unfortunate 
that prejudices and inequalities and injustice still persist. 
In America, the 
Declaration of Independence in 1776 proclaimed: All men are created equal. 
But even after two centuries, the fight of the black and the white continues. 
Segregation in schools, in buses, in trains and public places ended only when 
Martin Luther King led a satyagraha inspired by Gandhiji's ideas just a few 
years ago. But still everything continues to be much harder for the blacks. 
The change in our country, in the last 30 years, in the status and living 
conditions of the Scheduled Castes and Tribes has b.een considerable .. But 
. it· is far from satisfactory.· Our revolution is incomplete. 

For the atrocities or the hardships which the Scheduled Castes and 
Tribes are bearing, there are many causes; prejudice plays· a very great part. 
But apart from it, there is the very fact of their movement forward and the 
resentment which this causes in those who do not wish for such changes. 
All groups who have moved forward in all countries have met with such 
resistance which has to be fought, the challenge has to be met; and, this 
itself is a step showing that there is a forward movement. Another part is 
the atmosphere of lawlessness and violence. This is affecting not only 
Harijans but also others, especially those who are considered weak-our 
minorities and women of all castes and all religions. 

freedom and 

As in other walks of life, our revolution must continue : the revolution 
social justice. Our movement. tor 
to bring economic 
It is still going on and 
independence did not end on the 15th August 1947. 
it has a considerabie·way to go. 
In two fields especially, we must throw all 
our. energies to carry forward 
this movement, and, the two fields are 
national integration and the fight against poverty. The two are closely 
inter-related. 

National integration has three major aspects. First, the removal of all 
vestiges of disabilities from the lives of the Scheduled Castes, Tribes and 
Backward Classes. Secondly, the fight against the communal virus and the 
creation of a climate in which minorities do not have fear or suspicion and 
can live in peace ancl. harmony. And, thirdly, the total eradication of 
casteism or provincialism. 

From time to time, we call conferences to discuss problems of national 
integration. This does not mean that in other moments we neglect this 
work or have forgotten its importance. The work is a non-stop one. As 
-Government and as a party, we have always been totally committed to 
national integration. I cannot speak for the other Governments which held 

office at the Centre and in some of the States, but, to us, national integration 
is an article of faith; it is the very foundation of a free, progressive, modern 
India. 

Forces have been at work to create new communal and regional clashes 
the National Integration 
and tensions. That is why· we have revived 
Council. 
I am sorry that some parties and their leaders have refused to 
participate in the meeting. I earnestly appeal to them all to co-operate in 
this essential task. On certain matters, there can be honest political 
differences. But, at least one or two basic matte.rs should be regarded as 
national issues and above all controversies. On these, everyone should be 
willing to co-operate. Some people feel, and the Kerala Chief Minister 
has also written to me about this, that more people should be represented 
on the Council. A council should be as compact as possible although 
representing all major interests; but we could have subsidiary organizations· 
or sub-committees on which mote persons can be brought up, and, as you 
all realize, those will be the bodies that can really get to work. 

· .. National integration cannot. be a mere governmental movement. 

It 
has to be an all inclusive people's movement : the people of all castes, the 
people of all religions, the people of all regions. We are all partners in the 
building up of our country and we must ensure a fair opportunity to all 
people to realize their best potential, to make use of all their talents to 
develop their personality to the full. We should help people to overcome the 
handicaps from which they have suffered for years, and fight against every 
kind of deprivation, every kind of humiliation or lack of ability to take 
advantage of the rights which are theirs under our Constitution. To work 
for such a cause is the duty we owe to 
leaders like Mahatma Gandhi, 
Jawaharlal Nehru, Maulana Azad and other great 
leaders, and to 
pioneers like Ayyankali who had to fight against so many obstacles and 
hurdles. His courage and steadfastness to ideals is an in~piration; and, I 
hope it·will continue to inspire the younger generations. 

I have pleasure in unveiling the statue of this great pathfinder. 

National Integration 

WE HA VB ASSEMBLED here for a very important meeting. 
I am grateful 
to you all for coming. Obviously, the composition of such a gathering 
cannot be perfect. Many good people, who have the right views and are 

Opening remarks at the National Integration Council meeting, New Delhi, 
November 12, 1980 

secular in their working and in their thinking, have been left out. We can 
consider how to involve them in our work as we go along. 

The whole point of this meeting is not that we should just meet here, 
but that we should evolve son1ething. And I am not giving guidelines. We 
have come here to get your views on these matters. We could decide whether 
there should be some standing committees or other such methods by which 
our work can be continuous, and, we can keep in touch with what is 
happening and give guidance to the public. 

Some of our friends are not with us because of ill-health or other valid 
I can only hope that they will 

reasons, but some have deliberately kept out. 
reconsider their stand. 

Any occasion such as this is one for national stock-taking. We should 
not limit our discussions to the events only of the last few weeks or months. 
· Our concern is what kind of India shall we bequeath to future genera-
tions-a strong, harmonious, self-confident India or a feuding, weak, 
schizophrenic India. We talk of national integration. It is not a mere 
· phrase but an awareness of the burden and the task that history has placed 
·· on our shoulders. I have no doubt that all of us, whatever be our party or · 
· political creed, hold the freedom and integrity of our country as supreme and 
dear above all else. But freedom and unity cannot be taken for granted. 
Eternal vigilance is the price of our integrity, as it is of all liberties. 

We are living today in an era of particular turmoil. This takes all kinds 
of different forms in different parts of the world. There are wars; there are 
internal upheavals; there is political and spirituai disquiet, and dissatis-
faction with creeds and easy formulations. 
political interference as a substitute for open warfare. 

It is also an age of the use of 

Forces are at work in the world which are exploiting and will exploit 
any weakness on o.ur part, especially, at a If!.oment like this. 
In many 
countries, divisive groups receive support from-outside agencies and sources. 
It is 
I am often askt;d to name the foreign interests who are interfering. 
It is 
not always possible to lay your finger on such groups or individuals. 
extremely difficult here or elsewhere. But time and again, years later, 
evidence has come up which has shown what kind of interference or 
attempted interference there has been. 

I am not suggesting for one moment that our communal or caste 
troubles and linguistic movements are being 
instigated by outsiders. 
Neither I nor the Home Minister has blamed outside forces for the 
Moradabad, Aligarh and other incidents, although some papers and groups 
keep repeating that I have said so. But I have no doubt that any civil 
disturbance will weaken India and there will be groups who will 
advantage of such weaknesses and such differences for their own purposes. 
Most riots are provoked by a handful of persons or, perhaps, by a single 
person; but, because of the prevailing atmosphere of distrust and 
prejudice, because of the persistence of narrow loyalties of caste, of 

religion and of language, personal quarrels can soon be transformed into 
group clashes and assume a communal colour. This is what happened in 
Moradabad. A Court of Inquiry is going into the series of events there and 
it would not be right to speak of the precise causes. But when the situation 
is inflammable, it is not the person who strikes the match who can alone 
be held culpable, but the whole lot who put the combustible material 
there. 

Whether it be Moradabad or Tripura, events move at a fast tempo. 
Riots are becoming more brutal and lethal. We should, of course; diagnose 
the causes but long exercises and analyses are not always very helpful. The 
reports of the Enquiry Commissions come so long after the events that they 
have no utility except in the sense that everyone is supposed to learn from 
history.·. In medicine, many cures have b.een found before the causes have 
It is 
been established but here we know the. causes as well as the cures. 
because it. takes time, sometimes decades, to. overcome prejudices and the 
·spirit. of revenge tha:t. such outbursts persist. 

All in all, the manner in which religions have flourished in India is a 
remarkable story of tolerance, co-existence and fusion. At the same time 
we have been guilty of tolerating and perpetuating unjust social stratifica-
tion. The old evil of untouchability was a heinous crime. The peaceful 
revolution inspired by Mahatma Gandhi has helped our society to change. 
We had thought that with education, economic development and 
democracy, we could emerge into a new era of equality; but education and 
economic development have sharpened the competition for jobs. Adult 
franchise has given a new lease for caste, because we are still half way through 
this change. 

The minorities and weaker sections of the community feel that they are 
not fully in the mainstream tlf national life. They feel that the benefits of 
, economic development, of employment opportunities and the sharing of 
political power has bypassed them. As awakening increases and young 
people from these communiti~s demand a larger share 
in economic 
advancement and political power, there may be more tensions, but I feel 
that this is a passing phase. 

We are at the stage when the tensions and inequalities dominate our 
It is also unfortunate that the impartiality of the very forces, who 
minds. 
should ensure social harmony and justice and give protection, is questioned. 
So far, our major emphasis in tackling social violence has been on the law 
and order angle. However, I think that we should correct this approach 
and give due weight also to other aspects like educational policy, employ-
ment opportunities, better understanding of our cultural traditions and so 
on. 

No true religion can conceivably te!lch hatred of other religions, but we 
have had communal organizations which have persistently given a distorted 
picture. It is an unfortunate fact of life that these organizations are thriving 

in many parts of our country. We cannot be helpless spectators but should 
try vigorously to counteract the influence of such organizations by all 
political; legal and administrative means that are available. A party may 
gain when riots occur by blaming the Government, but such a gain is bound 
It is the people who are the sufferers and no -party can 
to be temporary. 
make a long-standing gain out of the people's misery. 

National integration has so far been mainly understood in terms of 
com1nunal harmony and the treatment of Harijans and other backward 
groups. Developments in the North-East have highlighted another aspect 
of national integ1ation. 

Assam is in the midst of a prolonged agitation on the issue of what is 
In dealing with this agitation, we have 

now known as foreign nationals. 
tried to follow the path of dialogue and have shown patience and under-
standing. 

About the depth of feeling underlined in the agitation, I have no doubt. 
But I would like our friends in Assam, whether it is the young students, the 
Parish'ad, or the government employees or any other section of the Assamese 
p'eople, to think of their problem in the larger context. They themselves 
keep reminding us that we should treat it as a national problem and any,such , 
problem is a national problem; but they should also keep in view the national 
aspect as well as international obligations, national commitments and 
humanitarian considerations. 

Assam must not suffer; India also must not suffer. Nor should 
hundreds of thousands of human beings suffer. A prosperous Assam cannot 
be built by striking at the root of national integrity, unity and our cherished 
ideals. The misgivings and 
apprehensions of minorities cannot be 
overlooked. 
In a democracy, such as ours, issues must be resolved through 
discussions and a solution found which, if not satisfactory to all, is at least 
the least unsatisfactory to all concerned. 

While Government will spare no efforts to see that genuine apprehen-

sions are allayed and economic development of the States of the North-East 
accelerated, a great responsibility rests on political leadership and on the 
idealistic youth to keep before the people the all India perspective, specially 
in view of their own future which we hope will be better with growing 
opportunities. 

The animosities between the tribals and non-tribals in the North-East, 
which had been dormant, have revived. Largely, these can be attributed to 
the divisive forces which have been at work and gained impetus during the 
recent past. People who have lived in amity for generations have suddenly 
begun looking at·one another with suspicion. All of us here are aware of 
the delicate problems of the North-Eastern States. 
I do not think I need 
to say more about this question at this moment. 

When this Council met in Srinagar in 1968, it was forcibly brought out 
that the term 'minority' should not be regarded as meaning only Muslims. 

For, in Kashmir, the Muslims are the majority. 
are the majority. 

In some places, Christians 

In fact; one of the special characteristics of our country is that no caste 
or group is in a position to dominate over the whole country. Let us 
convert this fact into a national advantage to ensure that there is a real and 
growing relationship of brotherhood and mutual responsibility based on 
trust. 

But the present is full of danger signals which add special urgency to 
our meeting and to our work. We are here, in all humility, to search and 
work together for solutions. 
I have no doubt that many useful suggestions 
will emerge from our meeting which we can act upon not only as Government 
and political parties but as custodians of the people's well-being. 

I welcome you once more and I hope that our deliberations will prove 

useful and will lead to some positive action. 

Rebuilding the Foundations of Progress 
IN THE LAST 'few years, India has had n1any emotional and political ups 
and downs. To understand them, one must realise how individuals and 
groups, who were largely opposed to Jawaharlal Nehru's 
ideas and 
formulations, joined hands with anti-Gandhi elements to challenge the 
policies of secularism, socialism, economic self-reliance and non-alignment. 
Initially, their effort was to come to power through extra-constitutional 

m:_eans, because they thought that they could not succeed through parlia-
mentary elections. We had to resist this bid to avert a disintegration of our 
system. __ The measures adopted to prevent the derailing of democracy gave 
anti-Congress parties and individuals an opportunity to misrepresent our 
motives and to spread a virulent and sustained campaign of propaganda 
against our party and my family. 

The elections which we called 

in 1977 brought in a government 
consisting of a loose alliance of opposition groups. Naturally, there was 
neither cohesion nor direction. Their dislike, I could even call it hatred, of 
Nehru blurred whatever little vision there was. One by one the institutions 
that had been built to put India on the road to science and technological 
transformation were dismantled. Self-reliance was regarded as irrelevant. 
There was criminal neglect of the investments for the infrastructure and for 
research. Scientists and other experts were made to feel largely superfluous. 

Tape-recorded message sent on November 11, 1980 to the India League, Lendon, for a 
seminar on 'Nehru and Contemporary World'. 

Even agriculture, for which the Janata and the Lok Dal Governments had 
claimed such devotion, suffered because of diminished technological support 
which is so necessary to sustain and carry forward the process of higher 
production. · When my Government was defeated, we had, fortunately for 
Janata Party Government and the country, left a legacy of twenty million 
tonnes of grain reserve, and the Janata Party Government had an extra 
bonus in the shape of unusually favourable rains for two consecutive years. 
But a government pulling different ways would naturally be subject to 
confusion for which the public paid dearly this year because of the debacle 
of their earlier sugar policy. 

Take industry. How could those, who had consistently attacked the 
public sector in favour of private profit, be expected to help basic and heavy 
industries, largely government-owned, even if a few ministers did proclaim 
themselves to be socialists? The slogan which originated in the West, 
'Small and Beautiful', came in very handy. Yet, there was no evidence 
besides words of substantial help to the small. The Plan was called a rolling 
plan. When you tried to grasp it, it rolled away. 

:i:n administration, the Janata Party took systematic but covert steps to 
weed out persons with secular and socialist credentials. This· was done 
most assiduously in education and the police services. School books written 
by n1odern scholars were replaced with unseemly haste. And the loss of · 
faith in the impartiality and effectiveness of the police that we find in some 
places today is the direct consequence of the caste and communal considera-
tions introduced at that time. 

The Janata and the Lok Dal boasted of restoring the judiciary to its 
place of respect. Yet they did not hesitate to harass hundreds of persons 
on the flimsiest grounds or to set up kangaroo courts, reminiscent of the 
market-place trials of the Middle Ages. The then Prime Minister and the 
Home Minister advised magistrates and judges about the line to be taken, 
and chastised those whose judgements they did not approve. 

· In foreign policy, the record of the governments of 1977-79 was dismal. 
The addition of the word 'genuine' to non-alignment brought only ridicule. 
Many non-aligned leaders have since remarked that to them it seemed that 
for three years India had disappeared from the international scene. 

Nehru-phobia was carried to such an extent that even an exhibition on 
him at the Delhi Trade Fair Ground was removed and,,mostly destroyed. 
Such was the regard shown for the maker of modern India. Photographs 
of Nehru and my own photographs, films and books were officially ordered 
to be destroyed. 

When we took over, I was stunned at the lethargy, the corruption, the 

utter lack of any sense of responsibility or of urgency or of the larger pers-
pective. 

The foreign exchange reserves, that we had built up through the labour 
of our people and by our foresight, had been recklessly squandered. The 

budget deficit of 1979-80 had gone upto the record figure of Rs. 27,000 
million. The capacity utilization of some public utilities had fallen a& low 
as.35 per cent. All in all it was a sorry state of affairs with a general 
denigration of values. _Even Rajghat-the 'Gandhi Samadhi'-became a 
stage for dramatic gimmickry. 

We are now struggling to put the pieces together. To wreck is easy; to 
rebuild takes time, toil and money. Little by little, painfully slowly, things 
are improving. There is disappointment that we have not worked miracles. 
Some commentators, who were and even now are apologists of the Janata-
Lok Dal combinations, are busy belittling our work, but India has begun 
to count again. 

We can make progress only if we keep in mind the ideas of the man 
whose birthday you are celebrating. He was interested 
in speculative 
thought, but he drew sustenance from the living people. He was neither 
dogmatic nor an arm-chair dreamer. His dreams for India were based on 
far-sightedness and his vision of India's future strength and greatness. He 
gave his life in building the foundations to translate his dreams into reality. · 

Government and the Opposition 

QUESTION : What type of relationship would you like to have between the 
Centre and the State governments which are ruled by parties other than the 
party in power at the Centre? 
In case the present Centre-State relationship 
is not cordial, what measures should be taken to restore cordiality? 

PRIME M~NISTER : It is obviously essential to have the most cordial relation-
ship between the· Centre and the States. Otherwise; neither will function 
effectively. There are enough mechanisms and conventions in our system 
to resolve whatever differences niay arise. 

The States often make unsubstantiated charges against the Centre, 
forgetting that it is in their own interest to have a Centre capable of helping 
It is whoily wrong to think that a strong Centre would weaken the 
them. 
States. And, it is ridiculous to allege that I am planning to destabilize the 
Governments of Kerala or West Bengal or Jammu and Kashmir. 

Each party has its own objectives and is bound to come into conflict 
with other parties. But the country's interest requires that these should not 
affect the relationship between governments run by different parties. You 

From replies to questions by the Malayalam daily 'Mathrubhumi', Trivandrum,· 
November 18, 1980 

cannot expect us to approve of every action of every State Government, or 
not to speak out when we think that a particular State is dissipating its 
resources. Overdrafts; for example, are a major problem. The Centre, 
with its responsibility for prudent management of the national economy, 
has to ·ensure that the States too exercise the necessary restraint. 

QUESTION : What should the Opposition do to improve the law and order 
situation? Is the present situation a creation of anti-social forces let loose 
by all political parties at the ground level, or, is it due to the ineffectiveness 
of the administrative machinery? 

PRIME MINISTER : It is part of politics for the Opposition to take advantage 
of Government's difficulties. But it is not democratic to create difficulties 
for the people merely to embarrass Government. 
In the last few months, 
many of our opposition groups are doing precisely that. 
In the North 
especially, their aim has been to arouse disaffection among those groups who 
had voted for me and my party-,vomen, Muslhns and Harijans .. We .. 

cannot forget that only a few years ago they did not hesitate to adopt 

unconstitutional methods, refusing · to wait even for · a few months · for 
elections. 

The riots and disturbances of law and order are due to the deterioration 
in administration that took place between 1977 and 1979, when people 
known for secularism and progressive views were weeded out. This had 
happened earlier under SVD Governments. Under . the Janata Party 
Government, it happened virtually all over the North. Governments calling 
themselves leftist have, on their part, not hesitated to harass their opponents 
through strong arm methods. The situation has to be dealt with through 
new thinking by all parties. The promulgation of the Security Ordinance 
has had some salutary effect on anti-social forces. 
I should like to reiterate 
that there is no intention whatsoever to use the Ordinance against political 
opponents. 

QUESTION : What do you think·are the chances of all those, who owed 
allegiance to the Congress Party of Nehru's days once again coming together 
to form a new party to. plan and implement dynamic programmes to 
eradicate poverty? 

PR~MB. MINISTER : It would be beneficial to the nation if all those, who believe 
in secularism, socialism and an independent foreign policy, work together. 
The trouble, however, is that many, who claim to be inspired by Jawaharlal 
Nehru, have acted in ways which are contrary to all that he stood for. They 
have teamed up with his inveterate critics. When we speak of Jawaharlal 
Nehru, we should bear in mind that he never claimed to have all answers to 
all questions... But he did show that we could acquire the strength to meet 

problems through rational thinking and the building up of people's institu-
tions and conventions of good behaviour. 

QUESTION : Addressing the Lawyers' Conference in Delhi, you said that it 
was not necessary for every democratic country to have a two-party system. 
Could you kindly clarify what you meant by this? Do you think that the 
present situation calls for constitutional alternatives? 

PRiMB MINISTER : What I said was that it would be wrong to equate 
democracy with a two-party system or to think that two-party societies are 
superior. How many parties a country has depends upon its history and 
It is not a matter for legislation or prescription by political 
circumstances. 
scientists. People's inability to practise self-restraint or wo1k with others 
leads to the birth of new groups. 
I need not mention any names. For 
decades people have been breaking away from the Congress. The 
Communists have gone on subdividing. We are told that there are 27 
CPI-MLs'. The Janata Party broke up as hastily as i_t canie together. 
It 
is.difficult to speak of institutional alternatives as long as there are indivi-
duals who will not let any institution work. We must continue the search for -
methods to improve our performance and functioning. 

Law Should Enlarge Freedoms 
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN principles and individual cases is the very 
heart of law. This links it with politics which deals with the manner in 
which abstract ideas affect the actual lives of people. 

Political science itself is changing. From a study of systems, 

it is 
becoming more and more a study of people's interaction with economic 
and social forces. Indeed, even the concept of 'people' has been changing. 
In earlier ages, only a small section of the population had rights. Others 
were not citizens. Today, with the spread of the democratic idea and 
the development of the means of knowledge, such limitation has become 
untenable except in anachronistic States like South Africa. 

Throughout our long struggle for national independence, we in India 
asked ourselves : "Freedom for whom?" Gandhi and Nehru's test of a 
social concept was its relevance to the lives of the poorest. Law should help 
the weak. Our own laws have traditionally sanctioned gross injustices-
such as the casting out of the so-called untouchables, and the denial to' 
women, especially widows, of the simplest human rights. 

Message to the meeting of the Hlllllan Rights Standing Committee of the Law Association 
for Asia and the Western Pacific held at Manila (Philippines), November 20, 1980 

DEMOCRACY AND NAT~ONAL STRENGTH 

In India, as elsewhere, laws have been continuously modified, making 
them more humane and less sectarian. The notable feature of the Indian 
experience is that major changes in politics and in law have occurred, in so 
vast a land, in a comparatively short time of one generation and in a peaceful, 
non.violent way. The abolition of untouchability and oflegal disabilities 
of women are of historical significance. 

We see rights in terms not only of protection from encroachment of 
the State, but in terms of possibilities for the growth of the human 
personality. We value our Constitution for not only what it forbids or 
permits, but what it promises. The Directive Principles of our Statute 
embody the aspirations of our nation, and our Fundamental Rights ensure 
the conditions in which those aspirations can be realised. 

Every legal idea is capable of many approaches. For example, take 
It confers a sense of security on the individual and places 
the right to life. 
a restraint on society. But, does not the concept confer a special right on the 
woman who brings a new life into the world? Has she no power to detc;r· 
mine whether the child she begets will have a fair chance to life, liberty 
and happiness? . 

India values democracy and · the freedoms that democracy implies. 
No society is as free as it claims; each has special historical reasons. for 
limiting the exercise of some rights. But there is need for a world·wide 
endeavour to enlarge freedom. 

Home Guards and Civil Defence 
THE DIRECTOR·GENERAL has just given us a lucid account of the 
structure and the functioning of the Home-Guards. The1e is nQ doubt that 
they perform a very useful service to the society. Here, in this conference, 
· we have people who have comef.rom different parts of the country, belonging 
to different walks of life in various strata of society. 
I am glad to hear that 
they have about a million volunteers. So, obviously it constitutes a very 
important force, and, the fact that they are volunteers and have come 
forward in a spirit of service, dedication and patriotism, makes it a very 
commendable effort. 

I am glad that the two organizations, i.e., the Home Guards and the 
Civil Defence, have recently been active in the maintenance of law and order, 
disaster relief and other socio,economic activities. They can also play a 

Speech at the Eighth Beinnial Conference of Civil Defence and Home Guards, New Delhi, 
November 20,-1980 

significant role in bringing about national integration. 
I hear that you are 
now active in promoting communal harmony and the protection and uplift 
of the weaker sections of society as well as undertaking other develop-
mental activities. 

Coming as they do from the grass-roots level, men of these organizations 
can be a vital link between the people and the administration. They can 
convey the local feelings to the administration and can be of considerable 
help to it in the prevention of communal disturbances and in bringing about 
It is necessary to ensure that minority groups 
local amity and goodwill. 
and the weaker sections are adequately represented, especially in the Home 
Gua~ds who sometime act as auxiliary policemen. . Jtis the responsibility 
of every citizen to help the Police in the mair.tenance of law and order. 
The Home Guards as auxiliary policemen have a special contribution to 
make. By their behaviour and service to the people, they must highlight 
their role as true friends of the people. 

It is a heartening development that the Home Guards are making an 
increasing contribution to' developmental activities, 
like protection of -
forests, fisheries, adult literacy, health · and . hygiene .· and other- socio> 
economic programmes. The scope in this sphere _ is unlimited. 
In each 
State, in conformity with the local conditions and requirements, we should 
use the service of these volunteers for such work. They are called upon to 
help unfortunate victims of flood, drought, fire, epidemic, cyclone and other 
natural and man-made calamities. This force, which is specially trained for 
such emergencies, has played a useful role in the past and can play still more 
significant role in the future. The role, which these volunteers played last 
year in the maintenance of essential services, is highly commendable. We 
rely on this standby force which is disciplined, dedicated and well-trained, 
to assist governmental agencies in meeting various contingencies. I am glad 
to say, they have always risen to the occasion. 

India is a peace-loving country and wants to maintain friendly relations 
with all countries, more so with our neighbours. 
the same time, we 
have to ensure that our Armed Forces are always vigilant and well-prepared 
to defend the country. However, every citizen has to play his part. The 
Civil' Defence Organization, which has a responsibility to save lives, 
minimise danger to property and maintain continuity of production in an 
emergency, must be kept in good shape. It is necessary that this organiza-
tion should remain alert and active. 

}.,..t 

I am glad to learn that you are also giving opportunity to unemployed 
young people not only to take part in your activities but, through that, to 
have a new outlook of service-a more constructive and positive outlook-
because quite often we see our young people joining more in destructive 
movements. So, if we can inculcate in them the spirit of patriotism and 
helping tb,e country in times of need, I think, that will make them better 
citizens. 

I am deeply concerned about the welfare of the Home Guards. 
Whenever they are employed on duties, especially as auxiliary policemen, 
they suffer death or injuries while performing their duty. My Government 
would always consider their case sympathetically. I am glad to hear of the 
proposal that is now being made. 
I hope it will not get stuck in financial 
difficulties. We are actively considering giving them benefits similar to those 
extended to policemen under these circumstances. 
It has been suggested 
that the Home Guards and the Civil Defence volunteers, after rendering 
national service for a few years in these organizations, should be given some 
weightage in government service. These youngmen and women, who 
imbibe the spirit of dedicated service and discipline and gain useful expe-
rience, need every encouragement for suitable employment anywhere 
including, of course, in government. 

I am told that all the Commanders General of the Home Guards and 
Directors of Civil Defence are present here. 
I am sure you will have fruitful 
.discussions, . and take decisions which will further strengthen your 
organizations to render still greater service to our people. · 
I am sure that you will live upto your motto of 'Nishkam Seva'. In 
any country, everybody has one job-their profession, their employment 
and the other as citizens. 
In this country, the citizen's task is more vital 
today than ever before, because we are at a stage of development which can 
shape our entire future. We face gigantic difficulties and problems. But, 
you know, I have tremendous faith in my country and its future and in the 
I have no doubt that they are capable of overcoming all 
people of India. 
· these difficulties. Today is the moment when we have to make a very major 
effort-to adopt the Chinese phrase, which did not work there but I hope 
it will work here-to 'leap forward'. 
If we are willing to take t~ risk and 
face hardship which such a leap involves, there is a very good chance of our 
arriving at a place which can ensure us much more rapid progress in every 
If we falter-in the last few years we have already gone back-
direction. 
wards-then we only slip further backwards. This choice is not of the 
Government. Government can give direction, it can take certain decision, 
but the choice has to be of the citizens. 

You know today, at this moment, when we need a concerted, united 
and tremendous national effort, where is that effort going? 
It is going in 
pointless agitations, agitations which are not helping the country, not helping 
the people who are agitating or the areas where these agitations take place. 
I think as leaders of the Home Guards and, through you, the Home Guards 
themselves have an equal duty to try and educate the people in this matter. 
Just as the privileges are the people's privileges, equally the burden of 
responsibility is theirs; if they are not willing to share it, I am afraid-
Government may come and go, it does not matter-when the people suffer 
the country goes back. 

It cannot be changed in a short time as we are finding. We took over 
the government nearly a year ago, but we find that we are still picking up the 
pieces which were scattered or dismantled in the short period, 
interim 
period. 
It is not just the pieces of some of the machinery that you can pick 
It is the demoralization of whole groups of people, 
and put together. 
cynicism that has grown in various sections. This is not something which 
you can remove just by lecturing them or putting forward new schemes. 
It is something which each person has to face within himself and decide: 
Is he going to give his all as a citizen to his country, or, is he, at this crucial 
moment, going to fail the country? 

Now, this is the attitude which is part of our foreign policy, which is 
part of our social policy, of our economic policy which is that of self-
reliance, that is, each person must learn to take decisions and to stand on 
It is only with this 
his feet. Of course, the government is there to help. 
spirit that the country itself can become self-reliant. · It is this spirit that 
· must imbue your other activities and which ·you m\J.St inculcate in allthose 
· who work under you. · · · · 

Public Service Commissions 
I AM GLAD to participate once again in your deliberations. You choose 
our public servants. You are the arbiters of the 
fates and careers of 
thousands of our young men and women. But your task does not end with 
selecting entrants to government service. You judge ~heir wor~ at various 
stages in their career. You serve as courts of appeal:on a variety of staff 
matters. You share responsibility for the·quality and competence of our 
administration. The Constitution has indeed placed a burden on your 
shoulders. 

The qualities universally expected of a Public Service Commission are 
impartiality as between person and person, 
reliability and impartiality: 
class and class, caste and caste, and, so far as the UPSC 
is concerned, 
between province and province. Fairplay is your first objective. But it is 
no less important to find the right person for the right job. It is possible to 
be right once by accident and twice by coincidence. But proving right can 
and must be made a habit through hard thinking and the powers of 
perception and analysis. That is why management is now called a science, 
and, the insights of scientific management are greatly needed in govern-
mental administration also. 

Inaugural speech at the conference of Chairmen of Public Service Commissions, 
New Delhi, November 27, 1980 

DEMOCRACY AND NATONAL STRENGTH 

.. ··:t. I 

It is not enough to choose bright people. Brightness is often a surface 
It is also not enough to judge people 
factor which can easily wear off. 
merely by their scholastic intelligence. It is much more in1portant to select 
those who are earnest and sound, who have character, courage, confidence, 
staying power, good nerves as well as good minds and, above all, who are 
willing and able to continue to learn as they go along. How do you find 
and gauge these qualities through impersonal tests and brief tense inter-
views? 
In our democratic system, an indispensable qualification for 
government servants is respect for the people, courtesy, even humility in 
dealing with them, and a realization that public good takes precedence over 
private advancement. 

Members of Parliament and eminent citizens have often expressed 
concern about tb.e under-representation of persons from the economically 
backward and underprivileged categories in the services. City life and birth 
in middle or upper. class homes offer better facilities for education and 
greater self-assurance which niay not be · available 
to people born in 
· . economically disadvantaged sections and bred in geographically. backward 
regions. · B_ut we should not exaggerate the supposed urban-rural divide or 
think that birth comes in the way of understanding. How~ver, it is 
necessary to guard against persistent imbalances in the services. 
It is a 
recognized responsibility of Public Service Commissions to devise methods 
of recruitment to ensure that disparities in standards of living, type of 
education and social background do not tilt the balance in favour of the 
more privileged people. Harijans, 
tribal youth, minorities and those 
coming from poorer sections of the society should be ensured that the door 
of government employment is wide open to them also. 

Examinations by themselves are not a sufficient measure even of mental 
calibre. Perhaps, as you know, Einstein's teachers thought hin1 to be dull. 
They were unable to glimpse his genius. . There is an old and well-known 
saying that no man is a hero to his servant. A reply has been given to this 
that it is not because the man is not a hero but because the servant is a 
servant. Britain is stiU recovering from the shock of discovering that the 
person, who devised their Intelligence Tests, Sir Cyril Burt, had cooked up 
his data. Constant refinement is necessary in the methods and systems 
of grading talent and suitability. Dr Shahare* has told us that the emphasis 
has now shifted from the essay type to objective tests. In fact, the persons 
who do well in written tests will also score in objective tests and interviews. 
Manual and technical skills, the capacity to learn on the job, and 
that 
intangible but most important quality of all, fortitude in a crisis, are not 
easy to judge. The attempt to forecast the future in terms of the know-
ledge of the past has its limitations. 

*Dr M. L. Shahare, Chairman, Union Public Service Commission 

Neither entrance tests nor confidential reports are enough. In-service 
training needs more systematic attention. Members of our higher services 
should -be provided opportunities to upgrade their knowledge and skills. 
An increii,sing proportion of governmental work now deals with technol~-
gical problems. Not only the generalist administrator but even the technical 
person needs to keep in touch with advances in ideas and practice. 

The Chairman has informed us that tests for the All-India Civil Services 
are being held in Hindi and other regional languages. This is a good 
beginning. English elitism has prevented our educational system from 
tapping our rural and regional resources. But in the world of today, it is 
vital to know some foreign languages, and to know them well. This applies 
to linguistic abilities as well as to general conceptual abilities. We must 
strengthen the post-recruitment training programmes to enable recruits to 
overcome their handicaps. No one should be ashamed of not knowing a 
particular thing, but be. eager to learn . and master 
I wonder if the 
National Academy in Mussoorie has the capacity to deal with all the aspects 
.· and· changing .sitMtion as it develops. 

it. 

The Union and the State governments have several million employees. 
To meet their problems, our personnel administration must be streamlined. 
The settlement of personal cases, removal of grievances, advance manpower 
planning and speedy replacement of personnel are some of the requisites of 
good personnel administration. 

The first point of reform is to avoid delay in recruitment and in deciding 
cases of promotion, confirmation, etc. Some of these cases are settled 
in consultation with the Public Service Commissions and should not give 
cause for complaint. The U.P.S.C. and other Public Service Commissions 
can improve administrative efficiency by advance planning, 
timely 
recruitment and quick 'decisions in personnel cases. 

Salaries in government no longer compare with salaries in some private 
sector companies. Yet, the security offered by government service, in a 
country with a high degree of educated unemployment, is attractive. Each 
person in government service must regard service as his first obligation. 
He must take special care to avoid any label of partisanship, any religious, 
caste or narrow regional bias. But there is one common thing that I do 
expect of them-unwavering loyalty to the country and its future. 

This conference, as you have said, is a good forum to exchange views 
and share experiences which could make our public services task-oriented, 
efficient and objective. The Chairman has touched upon several important 
problems in his speech. 
I hope that your discussions will be purposive, 
interesting and useful. 

Fair Deal for Backward Classes 
THE QUESTION OF the backward classes is one which is important not 
only for those who belong to those classes or castes or to backward regions, 
it is a national question, and it is one with which all of us have to concern 
ourselves if we want balance and equality in our society, if we want peace 
and harmony without which there can be no economic or other progress. 

I am specially glad to have this opportunity of being with you today. 
It is customary to call me for inaugural functions when important progra-
mmes are to be started. On those occasions, however, one does not know 
how these program.mes are likely to go on and what direction they are going 
to take. 
.The end is not always in sight. But in a valedictory function, the 
difficult task has been completed and in a way it is a celebration.. 

· In our Constitution, Article 46 of the Directive Principles enjoins on the. 
· State the duty to promote, with special care, the educational and economic 
interests of the weaker sections. Article 15( 4) permits the making of special 
provision for socially and educationally backward classes, besides the 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. Article 16(4) refers to special 
provisions in favour of backward classes in public appointments. And, 
Article 340 provides for the appointment of a commission to investigate the 
conditions of the backward classes. These provisions reflect the nation's 
understanding, from the very beginning, of the need for special treatment 
1n favour of such classes. 

But such treatment is not intended to create new disparities; it is there 
to redress ·:existing injustices. The aim is to overcome historical and 
geographical handicaps, not to create new vested interests. In the categori-
zation of classes and in the designing of programmes to benefit them, 
this aspect should be kept before us all the time. 

We are committed to a secularand socialist society. We are committed 
to planned development for the betterment ofeconomic conditions and the 
quality of life for the Indian citizen. These objectives can have meaning 
only if those, who are most backward amongst us, educationally or socially, 
are helped to come forward and share the benefits of economic development. 
The categorization of backward classes, apart from the Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes, has always been difficult. Some States have 
attempted such categorization, but at an earlier time such an attempt by the 
Centre through the first Commission on Backward Classes was not very 
successful. 

Speech at the valedictory function of the Backward Classes Commission, New Delhi, 
December 12, 1980 

The question of caste becomes relevant in this context. Some people 
feel that backwardness should be related to economic criteria only. Others 
feel that the differentiation should be based on castes. 
· Sometimes it seems 
to us that there is a competition to be classed as 'backward'. And because 
of the democratic system, which is highly competitive, a new lease has been 
given to caste and community. 
I do not want to enter into any controversy 
over this subject. 
I should only like to point out that we shall have to devise 
a formula which commands wide public acceptance, besides strengthening 
our national fabric. 

I congratulate your Commission on its labours. You will be submitting 

your report shortly to the President and I can assure you that the Govern-
ment of India will give full consideration to your recommendations, for 
we are as interested as you are in setting right this long-standing wrong and 
in creating a society which is a proper base for making a stronger, better 
and brighter future for our country. 
· I would like to end with a quotation that probably al) of you know 
I myself used it once in- one of my Red Fort speeches. I think 
very well. 
that it is very relevant. It is what Gandhiji said when he was asked to giv~ 
his advice on how a person should judge whether he was following the right 
direction or not. This is a quotation which I have kept in my outer office 
in Parliament House, and I shall read it : 

"I will give you a talisman. Whenever you are in doubt or when the 
self becomes too much with you, apply the following test : Recall the face 
of the poorest and the weakest man whom you may have seen and ask your-
self if the step you contemplate is going to be of any use to him. Will he 
gain anything by it? Will it restore him control over his own life and 
destiny? In other words, will it lead to Swaraj for the hungry and spiritually 
starving millions? Then you will find your doubts and self melting away." 

Of course, Gandhiji wrote at a time when he referred largely to 
political freedom. But his concept of Swaraj and our concept of Swaraj 
is a very much wider one and it includes the ending of poverty, disparity 
and injustice. And I hope your report will help us in this direction. 

A More Humane, More Competent Police 

You KNOW THAT 

the police are a major line of contact between 
government and the people. The entire government gets a good or a bad 

Speech at the conference of Inspectors-General of Police, New Delhi, December 19, 1980 

u ; ' .. I ·' 

name depending on the level of competence and courtesy of the police. Of 
late, the police have been greatly in the news and, as you will all agree, in 
rather an unfavourable light. The decline in the prestige of the police and 
certain trends within police and security forces are causing us much concern. 
We should act speedily to correct the situation. 

There are two main indicators of a healthy society-a low rate of crime 
and a high rate of production. Some societies, which are regarded as 
advanced and economically thriving, get a poor rating for quality of life 
because of their inability to ensure civic safety. A foreign correspondent 
asked me the question : "Is it true that some cities in India are becoming 
as bad as Central Parkin New York?" Because of increasing permissive-
ness-particularly with the growth of the drug habit among young people-
cities which were once regarded as safe are becoming dangerous. 

Our country has to deal with two sets of problems-· those which arise 
out of development, and, those which are the result of old inequalities or 
traditions. 
In the · coming decade, political and· economic pressures are 
· nkely to worsen. Even when governments are returned to power. with. a.· 
clear mandate, there are forces which are act.ive 
to destabilize them .. 
Every day we see a new agitation in some part or other of the country. Some 
agitations are the result of inflation and economic hardship, some are the 
delayed consequence of the period of virtual absence of government, but 
some are deliberately engineered to bring the present Governments at the 
Centre and in the States into discredit. 

Agitations are an attempt to undermining Government's legitimacy 
through extra-constitutional action. They pose a major challenge to us. 
It is a well-planned effort 
Take the farmers' agitation in some States. 
on the part of relatively well-to-do sections of the farming community. 
The ostensible objective is higher support price for their produce. And 
here, I must make a distinction because there are some farmers who are 
small farmers within t]j.is, and they have a just cause, although it is not 
alwaysj,ossible to meet their demands. But so far as the others, the richer 
farmers, who give the leadershipin these agitations, are concerned, their 
real reason is to obstruct the Government. If we yield to the demands, 
the equilibrium in rural areas will be disturbed, and there will be greater 
inflation and sharper polarization between villages and towns. Forces 
which have no real love for farmers are trying to take charge of these 
agitations. 

In towns, we see attempts to whip up trade union trouble. 

Industrial 
and white-collar employees are resorting to agitational methods ignoring 
the needs of the rest of the community. Students arid youth, always 
inflammable material, are enlisted in various agitations, some of which 
In Punjab and Andhra Pradesh, for instance, 
students agitating against an increase in bus fares have even attacked police 
stations. 

turned violent. 

Even more worrisome than these is the recrudescence of communal 
and caste tensions. The incidents in U.P. began as private feuds, but some 
· groups quickly fanned the fires so as to make it appear that Government 
was unable to protect the minorities. The widespread publicity abroad 
for these incidents has done no good to the country or to the task of 
building greater mutual trust between various sections of the people or 
between the people and the police. 

Situations leading to caste conflicts are being contrived. This has 
resulted in a series of clashes between the so-called 'upper' and 'lower' 
castes. . It is important that no single section should impose its will upon 
others by virtue of a claimed superiority either of numbers or of economic 
power. The growth of regional and parochial tendencies has also been 
unfortunate. 

The agitation in Assam against 'foreigners' is an extreme example of 
regionalism. There are no easy solutions for the Assam . problem. The 
genuine apprehensions of the people of the State have to be taken note of.· . 
But we cannot have a massive uprooting of people who have been resident·.·. 
in the State for long years. Solutions can only be achieved through careful 
thought and calm discussion and not through agitations, pressures or 
economic blockades. The nation cannot be held to ransom. 

This particular agitation, as you know, has given a militant thrust to 
many of the smaller regional and local demands, and has spawned a host 
of demands for the removal of 'outsiders' and preference for so-called 
'locals'. The Jharkhand movement, which is largely centered in South 
Bihar and adjoining areas of Bengal, Madhya Pradesh and Orissa, the 
pressures for a separate Kamptapur Desh, Uttarkhand or Gorkhaland 
have, in a sense, the same genesis and potential for trouble. Parochial 
organizations like the 'Am.ra Bangalee' also find opportunities in this 
situation to expound their beliefs, the latest version being the demand for 
'Bangali:stan' in which parts of Bangladesh are also supposed to be 
incorporated. 

Problems are also posed by left-wing and right-wing extremist groups. 
The former, despite their fragmented nature, have succeeded 
in gaining 
considerable support among our youth and students. They have also 
increased their violent activities. Right-wing groups are active in almost 
all current agitations. There is fear that communal elements have infil-
trated the police forces and are unsympathetic to the minority groups. There 
is danger from secessionist and insurgent groups which need to be carefully 
matched. 

Equally, we have to be careful about some of those 'Gurus' who have 
their Ashrams abroad and who come here from time to time. You will 
have noticed that they have far larger a following amongst foreigners 
and especially Americans, West Germans and other natio-rialities. We have 
reason to believe that these Ashrams are exploited by various sections, 

some of these rightist-extremist groups within India and even by f()reign 
agencies .. 

To meet all these challenges, the police force must have a high sense 
of direction and integrity. From Inspectors General down to ordinary 
constables, the police must be imbued with a sense of purpose and 
responsibility .. The police must be effective. But effectiveness does not 
mean strong-arm methods. The results have to be achieved through 
. means which are democratic and which will be regarded as just and 
legitimate in a society like ours. 

Incidents in Bhagalpur have shown not only the police, but our own 
people, our village people, in a bad light. And Bhagalpur, as we now 
know, is not an isolated incident. We have hearq of similar happenings 
in West Bengal. And since both these happenings are not new, they are 
months old, it is possible that such things, that other equally cruel methods, 
have been used in other parts of the country. 

What do we do about it? This is something in which I think you 
should give your views .. · I can understand the problem that it is difficult 
. to bring dacoits or Naxalites to justice because the people are not willing . 
to testify. We have nun1ero:us cases where the worst type of criminals, 
who have indulged in murder, rape; theft and· harassment of the village 
people on a very large scale over a long period of time, get scot free because 
witnesses do not come forward. Some say it is because there is connivance 
of the police. 
I do not know. But that they do get away remains a fact 
of life. 

Recently, I have heard that dacoity is again on the increase in Madhya 
Pradesh. We had tried to stem and had achieved some initial success. 
It has grown tremendously in certain areas of U.p. So, there is no easy 
solution, but a solution n1ust be found and a solution cannot be one which 
involves the people taking justice in their own hands. The people take it 
only when they feel that the police and the other arms of the Government 
in auth9rity have failed. 

We had incidents of killings of whole families in West Bengal some 
years ago. The people said : '').'he police are not able to protect us, and, 
therefore, we have done this on our own". It did help the situation in the 
sense that for a long period afterwards that particular area ·was free of 
crime. But that is not a method which can be advocated or encouraged. 
It is for you to suggest and to think deeply about how these situations 
can be tackled; there have to be short-term answers and long-term 
schemes. 

In Bhagalpur, as you know, these actions have received a high degree 
of popular support and I noticed the same in Bengal in the previous 
incidents. But as I said earlier, no organized or civilized society can endorse 
extra-legal methods in the name of effectiveness whether it is to contain 
crime or to maintain law and order. 

Senior police officials should gfve greater thought to this problem 
and tell us how the police can be made more humane as well ·as more 
competent. Senior officials must inculcate in their men the realization that 
no action can be really effective unless the methods have a legitimacy in terms 
of established social and cultural norms and legal framework of our 
country. 

There is widespread criticism of the police for failure to keep crime. 
under check. Present-day criminals are more organized and better equipped. 
So, the police use more sophisticated methods to deal with them. We 
must adopt scientific methods of inquiry and investigation using modern 
techniques, employing greater mobility and proper intelligence. 

I find that even now we tend to confine intelligence work to the police, 
whereas everywhere in the world people try to have a vast network amongst 
every section of the people belonging to the country and even amongst 
foreigners. I know that some beginning has been made in this but it is far 
·. from satisfactory .. · I can say from my own experience that I usually know· 
what is happening long before the intelligence report of it comes in, and, 
usually I know it iri greater detail than supplied to me. 
Unless there is a close contact of the policemen or the.intelligence officer 
with the people of the region in which he is working, he will never get proper 
or timely reports merely fro1n other policemen. Old techniques are now 
completely outdated and they are not of much use. 

Senior officers should personally supervise cases which cause public 
disquiet and concern. Long before there is any kind of an explosion, there 
is a simmer ofit, there is a spark ofit. 
If action can be taken at that time, 
you can prevent the explosion from .taking place. 
I can understand the 
anxiety to protect your subordinates, but sometimes it goes to a length 
where you yourself get a bad name and the work suffers greatly. Obviously, 
all the security forces must be ensured of support when they have to deal 
firmly or when they are doing their duty; but if there is corruption or if there 
is any other wrong doing, that must be punished. 
It does not matter if it 
is a policeman or an official or anybody else. If we do not do it, then; you 
cannot expect to gain the trust of the country, because, in our country, 
it is the people of the land who should be the real masters and everything we 
do should be done keeping that in view. 

I am referring it now, for instance, to my security. 

I also :find that the police seem to have great difficulty in knowing who 
is a dangerous person and who is not. 
I made this remark in previous 
conferences also. 
am not interested in security. But often the people they try to restrain are 
people who, I could swear, would never do anything wrong, whereas I see 
people of whom I would be suspicious, nobody is bothering about restraining 
them. Usually, if a person is badly dressed or looks poor, then, he is the 
one who is pushed-around, -whereas the better dressed person is allowed 
to wander or do anything. 

DEMOCRACY AND NAT~ONAL STRENGTH 

It is not only a question of security, it is also a question of law and order, 
because today you will have seen that many of the thefts and other crimes 
are committed by persons who are not so poor. They are much better 
dressed and· quite often they are stealing things of very high value. So, 
this old attitude of looking down on the poor people is one that must be 
simply washed away from your police forces. 

Speedier investigation and the prosecution of cases is vital. Undue 

delay detracts from the merit of any action taken by the police. 

At the same time, we should try to find out whether your personnel have 
any genuine hardships. Some grievances hke shortage of quarters can be 
remedied only in the course of time because of lack of funds. But, there are 
other grievances which arise merely from a bureaucratic approach or from 
It 
somebody wanting to stick to a decision which he has taken earlier. 
is in your hands to correct such problems promptly. 

I am particularly sorry about the recent agitation by employees of RAW 
aud other agencies dealing with intelligence work. Such indiscipline will 
compromise the very quality and utility of their work 
I have no hesitation 
. in· saying. that· . organizations . connected· with such . sensitive· matters as 
intelligence and the security of the nation, cannot and must not permit 'any 
type ot indiscipline whatsoever. We shall only be inviting ridicule and 
danger if we do not deal firmly with this insubordination. But again I 
would say that we should see whether we can deal with their difficulties, their 
problems and their grievances before they come to such a stage. 

The police force is an instrument of social change. The present image 
of the police among the public is that it consists of unthinking individuals. 
This must change. A change can be brought about through imaginative 
understanding at th~ higher levels of the Force and intensive training at 
lower levels. 

I have repeatedly emphasised the importance of training for members 
of the police force at every level. There is apparently something wrong with 
our t~aining which prevents the i;,olice force from being friends of the 
innocent. 
I hope this Conference will devote special attention to the 
problems of training. 
I thinl<. that you should not hesitate to ask for ideas 
even from your subordinates, ·because they are in constant touch with 
the people on the roads, in shops and so on and they may also have good 
ideas as to how to bridge this gap that has developed between the police 
force and the people. 

The basic thing that I see from my experience is that in training, you 
do not seem to strengthen the capacity to observe. How much does a person 
see when he is just walking straight? How much does he know what is 
happening left and right, behind him and in front of him? This is a very 
I find from the policemen-and I have come in contact 
important thing. 
with a very large number, they were large enough before, but now whole 
battalions of. them seem to be surrounding the place wherever I go-that 

they do not really know what is happening. They have absolutely no 
idea of what is happening on any side, wh~reas I have noticed and I can 
describe to you, at any time, not only what people are doing, but also what 
they are wearing, what their expressions are. Even when that knife was 
thrown ·at me in Delhi I had seen that man. · I knew he was going to throw 
something, but of course I thought he was just throwing an application. 
I noticed from his expression that he was either ill or frightened. He was 
not a normal looking person. But I dotibt if any of the security or the 
police, who were around me, had either seen him, because he was about 
four rows behind, or had noticed anything about him. And I had seen tiot 
only him, I had seen the people who were standing on the opposite side as 
well. But I specially looked at him because of that expression on 
his face. 

So, unless you have this power of observation, you cannot tell who is 
guilty, who is a person likely to do something wrong, who is a person who 
is merely in trouble, or who is a person who is entirely innocent. This is a 
very ini.portant part of training and I am sorry that it is ·not inculcated in 
our schools.. I have it only because I happened to. go to s.chools which 
placed the greatest importance on this and said that nothing else mattered 
if you did not have the power· of observation. 

The second thing is the attitude of life-not to get involved in caste 
considerations and communal considerations or to try to be popular. 
Sometimes they think they will please one group or another by doing a 
j particular thing. 
impartial. 
[It is there for punishing the guilty, but it is equally there to protect the 
"··innocent. Don't forget that aspect of it. 

the police has to be absolutely 

Now, 

I have .put some ideas before you. You have greater experience in 
the field and I am sure that you will come up with many ideas yourself, and, 
I hope it will be possible to implement them. 

Development of the North-Eastern Region 
You ALL KNOW of my special interest and affection for the people who 

live in the North-East, ,and indeed in· all of our border areas. This 
North-Eastern Council was formed so that attention could be focussed 
on _the special problems of the region. Every meeting so far has been in 
the North-Eastern area; and, I think, it is a good idea that you have come 

Speech" at the meeting of the North-Eastern Council, New Delhi, December 22, 1980 

DEMOCRACY AND NATIONAL. STRENGTH 

here; not only does it give the opportunity to others of hearing you and 
meeting you, but for you also to have a wider perspective and be able to 
meet different people. 

I am glad to have the opportunity of addressing the Council once again 
and discussing with you the working of this institution, which is an example 
of regional co-operation in our vast country. 

We have two new Chief Ministers with us this time-in Assam and 
Manipur. We wish them and the new Government in Assam well. The 
Chief Minister of Assam was unable to come but I welcome Mr. Rishang 
Keishang, who may be new here, but he is an old friend and well known to 
us all. 

I also greet the Chief Ministers of the other States present here. 

In our system, the States are distinct units and each has its problems, 
but a regional approach helps each unit to solve its problems better. Even 
in the international sphere the regional approach is now .being welcomed. 
Every one of the States and Union Territories of our North-East.has its· 
own personality; yet, there is a family resemblance among them. That is 
why the expression 'seven sisters' came to be applied to them. · The rest 
of the country holds the 'seven sisters' in special affection. 

The complexities and diversities of India are many. These relate to 
language, religion, resource endowments and the quality and pace of 
development. But we are an integrated whole, determined to survive 
unitedly in spite of differences. Vole are constantly trying to resolve these 
differences. All States and all regions must share burdens and contribute 
to the development of the country as a whole. The country's progress 
does not depend only on the speed of the fastest, but must take-into account 
the pace of the weakest. This is why our schemes of development pay 
special attention on the redressal of regional disparities. 
The North-East is one of our lesser developed regions. 

Its resources-

physical and human-must be better utilized. The people: are impatient 
for development and we can understand this. The restlessness of the young 
people in.creases when they se~ the advance in other parts of the country. 
In the initial stages, the processes of economic development aggravate ~ 
disparities. 

Regions or countries, which are backward and which have to run to keep 
the same pace, start with big handicaps. A great deal of development has 
taken place, but we have to go a long distance still. The main sectors 
of development of the North-Eastern region are : transport, communication, 
power management, modernization of agricultural practices, marketing, 
institutional finance and training. In each of these, there has been advance 
under the direction of the Council. 
In transport and communications, 
power and agriculture and in industrial development, many new projects 
have been taken up. 

As soon as our Government took over office this year, we appointed 
a Committee of Ministers to give extra impetus to your development 

.... "' .---·---s,--.- -

projects and programmes. A high-power committee of officers under 
the Cabinet Secretary has been at work to determine areas where 
special attention is needed. The committee has identified schemes requiring 
priority attention for the development of roads, railways, services and 
productive activities in agriculture, horticulture, water management, 
handicrafts, handlooms, and small 
industries. The development of 
manpower has received special emphasis. The North-Eastern Council 
will have to dovetail this effort into a long-term perspective. While doing 
so, you have to keep in view the socio-economic needs of the different States 
in the region. You must also ensure that the weaker section of society, 
particularly the tribals, get a fair deal. 

We are intent on completing the new Brahmaputra bridge within the 
Sixth Plan and also taking up the Garo Hills Ropeway. We want the health 
and medical facilities in the area to be strengthened and a Working Group 
has been constituted to look into the proposal for ati Institute or Medical 
Sciences. We want to strength.en the infrastructure of roadways. Recently, 
more roads .are being converted to National Highways standards. We 
also want you to get greater benefit from y6ur· coal · reserves. The . 
geo-technical surveys must be expedited. At present only 2.5 % of the area 
has been surveyed. This has to go up to at least 75 % in a short 
time. 
There is vast scope for diversifying agriculture-based industries. With 
more imaginative marketing, the handicrafts will have far greater sale 
in the country and even abroad. The utmost care should be taken to 
conserve the authenticity of designs. 

The Council must bear in mind the need for constant monitoring of the 
progress of projects. Enthusiasm in the formulation and sanction of 
projects is not always sustained in their implementation. While the primary 
responsibility of this will be on the State Governments, the North-Eastern 
Council must constantly be on the look-out for delay, slackness and other 
problems which may arise. I am told that even -simple matters like land 
acquisition for projects get delayed. It is possible that the regulations of 
land tenancy vary among the different States of the region. But the States 
should show more interest 
in their quick resolution. The projects are 
meant for their own development. I urge the Chief Ministers to evince 
personal interest in these matters which are said to hold up quick clearance 
of projects. 

Another area where we must be vigilant is ecological and environmental 
well-being. All over the world, and in many parts of the country, the 
desire for immediate results has harmed the long-term interests of the State 
as well as of the country. I have been told about the denudation of forests 
on the hill slopes in the North-Eastern region because of road construction 
and other projects. Roads are to be made, but they should be made in 
such a way that they do not ruin the ecology of the hill areas or encourage 
landslides and other s.uch calamities. 

· I have been receiving complaints that many species of wildlife are now 
in danger because of indiscriminate felling of trees and poaching. The 
North-Eastern· region is a rich repository of plant life. For ultimate 
prosperity, the preservation of flora and fauna of this region is as important 
as starting of industries and agricultural programmes. Decision-makers 
should always keep in mind their answerability to the future. 

The Council and indeed all the governments of the region should make 
the people aware of the common heritage of our country. This can be 
fostered in great measure by properly planned schemes of tourism. 
I refer 
not only to the inflow of tourists to this region, which no doubt has to be 
carefully fostered, but also facilities and encouraging of people of this 
region to visit other parts of the country. The North-Eastern Council 
could play a very useful role in thls also. 

The region has witnessed a great deal of turmoil in recent years. The 
agitation in Assam and other parts of the region and the killings in Tripura 
have caused much disquiet in the whole country. They have also not 
Indeed, the preaching of narrow. loyalties is 
helped national integration. 
against the interest of us all. 
India. is. known for traditions of ho.spitality 
and goodwill as also our willingness over the centuries to assimilate all that 
is good· everywhere else. 
Indian culture has followed an open-door, open-
window policy accepting many ideas and influences from other civilizations. 
The same spirit of tolerance marked our attitude to people who came 
into our country and shared whatever we had to offer. We have also 
seen the heart-warming spectacle of Indians contributing to development 
abroad. They have become full partners in the lives of those countries. 

The agitators unfortunatey have not understood 

this vital ingredient 
of our national genius. We have shown a great deal of patience in spite 
of the strains, but divisive elements cannot be tolerated. Any resort to 
violence has to be sternly d~lt with. . 

In spite of the year-long=tigitation, the blockade of oil and timber going 
out of the State and disruption of the administrative machinery, the Govern-
ment was able to ensure adequate supplies of essential commodities tci the 
people of the region. On oce.asions there were some shortages but, on the 
whole, the people's needs are met. I should like to congratulate the officials 
who were responsible for this notable achievement against heavy odds. 
However, without the right political and social environment, it is difficult 
to achieve development. 

I do not have to tell you how much economic loss the Assam agitation 
has caused to Assam itself and to the nation. 
In Assam and in Tripura, 
Manipur and Meghalaya; the development process has slowed down because 
of the diversion of the energies of the people and the Government. Although 
we have made special efforts at great cost to ensure essential inputs, 
important projects have been considerably delayed. It is ironical that there 
should be scarcity of petroleum products in the North-East! 

The chairman has made various suggestions and I am sure they will 
be gone into carefully by all those concerned here in the Centre. As I said 
earlier, this meeting is being held in Delhi so that the Members of the 
Council can exchange views with Central Ministries and organiza.ti<;>ns and 
I hope the Col'mcil 
give them a better understanding of their problems. 
will make the best use of this opportunity. 

I give you all, the States individually as well as the Council itself, my 
very good wishes for your deliberations here. And since I may not see you 
all together, I wish you merry Christmas and happiness in the New Year 
as well. 

On Her Performance 

.. Quiis~ION: Madam Prime Minister, you are completing omil year in office; . ·. 
What do you think have been your principal achievements? 

PRiME MINISTER : We have restored a sense of direction in internal as well 
as external policies, especially in development work and in our search for 
technological self-reliance. We have got people thinking about serious 
problems, though this is a process which must be continuous and must be 
constantly kept up. Unfortunately, some individuals are trying to divert 
the attention of the people to issues which are not so fundamental. 

QUESTION : Your critics say it was a year of non-performance. The 
conditions in the cou]itry do not seem to have improved in this year. To 
what would you attrioute this? 

P.R:(ME M'.l}<ISTER: Well, who are these critics? They have been criticising me 
all the time, no matter what I have done. The performance that I talk 
of is not something that I am imagining. The rate of inflation has come 
down. Various units which were not functioning well have started to 
function. The wrong type of men had been put in various establishments 
and that is why the maintenance of plants was poor. You see if the 
maintenance of a house has been poor for some years, you cannot all of a 
sudden say that it will be put in order in a few months. 
It is a long and 
extensive process. We have now begun this process. 

QUESTION ; Has there been any visible improvement in this one year? 

Interview with Smt Fatima Zakaria of the Times of lndia, New Delhi, December 29, 1980 
{Published in the issue of January. 1981) 

~ M~N1STBR : Of course, there has been a visible improvement. 
Certainly, for example, in external affairs where the improvement could be 
felt soon after we assumed office. But even on the domestic front we have 
been able to show results. The very fact that we have been able to curb the 
rate of inflation fa no small achievement. However, the price curb has not 
so far been reflected in all the retail prices. 

QUESTION : What are the main challenges the country and the government 
face in the coming year? And how do you propose to tackle these? 

PRIME M~NISTBR: Well, I think that the country is in a better position now to 
face the challenges than it was when I took over. It is unfortunate that the 
Opposition is trying to take advantage of every possible agitation regardless 
of its effect on the country and regardless of how it is coming in the way of 
strengthening the nation. 

In the new year, we have to stimulate productio_n, ensure that publk: 
distribution is much more effective and increase exports. _ . We have bro11ght -
down inflation to some extent; but it is still in two digits. - We wouldlike to· 
bring it down to one digit. Above all, law and order must improve. 

QUESTION : What have been your main problems, handicaps and difficulties 
during 1980? 

PRIME 1v1INISTBR : Some of the main problems, I would say, were domestic and 
some others were the result of the worsening international climate. At home, 
we had a very severe drought in large parts of the country. The previous 
goven1ment did not maintain the existing units properly and did not make 
ad~quate investments in infrastructure. The effects of this neglect cannot be 
uncyone very·quickly. · Then the communal situation had deteriorated under 
the previous set-up. It has improved to some extent now. But it seems to 
me that there is a constant effort to create-suspicion and distrust a,mong 
different sections of people. 

QUEST\ON : By whom? 

PRIME M~NISTBR : It is very difficult to say who. It may be an individual. 
There may be groups in the Opposition. When I say the Opposition, I don't 
want to tar everybody with the same brush because, obviously, not all are 
communal. There are among them those who are communal and have 
always been so. There are others who are not. I don't want to lump them . 
this 
together. But they do take advantage of such a situation. In fact, 
is the first time I find them doing so. Previously, there was a little more 
thought given to such things. 

QUBST10N : But they are in such a minority. 

' r· 

PRIME MINISTER : You take the Assam problem-the Jan Sangh's support · 
for the agitation, for example. Now,· there has never been any quarrel as to 
· · who is a foreigner. Everyone is agreed oµ that. All we are saying is that 
we should begin the work and the situation will get clarified. 
In the midst 
of agitation it is not possible to do so. But they will not allow us to 
proceed. So, what the Jan Sangh has done is to frustrate all efforts that we 
have made towards a solution of the problem. 

It seems to me that the Opposition gets desperate very quickly; this is 
what happened last time too. This time they have got desperate even 
sooner. We had been back in office hardly a month when they started 
functioning in the same old fa~hion. 

QUESTION : But the Opposition seems totally fragmented and demoralized; 
its role in agitations has been· only marginal. 

· PRIME M~NISTER : The .agitations may not be . their own. But. they _do 
encourage agitations. . When people, who have been ministers · and ·held_· 
important posts, support such agitations in the manner they have been doing, 
they do vitiate the atmosphere. 

QUESTlON : So, you feel that the Opposition can still hamper your efforts 
to take the country forward? 

PRIME MINISTER: Well, it seems to be so, and I think it is the very fragmen-
tation of these parties that gives them such a destructive and obstructive 
outlook. They seem to jump at every opportunity to do something against· 
tb,e government. There are so many among 
them who are creating 
difficulties for the country. By adopting this attitude, they are not harming 
me personally. But they are certainly doing a disse,vice to the nation, 
especially to the poorer and weaker sections and to the minorities. 

QUEST~ON : Apart from the economic difficulties inherited by you from 
Janata, there are certain problems the country faces. Some of them are 
beyond our control like oil prices, shrinking aid and markets abroad. But 
how do you view domestic difficulties such as shortages of coal, power and 
steel, 
inadequacy and inefficiency of railway transport and high food 
prices? 

PR\MB M~ISTBR: We are working very hard to eliminate all these shortages 
and difficulties. The power situation has improved considerably. Coal 
production has improved. Power has improved by 20 per cent. The railways, 
which had got stuck for a long time, are now showing 
improvement. 

QUESTION : The railways have been tbe main poblem, haven't they? 

PRIME MINJ;STER : But they are moving forward now. The current year's 
food prospects are good. Now the. problem is that those who produce 
food clamour for higher prices. From where will the money come except 
from the consumer? And, is the consumer willing to pay the higher prices? 
You should really put the question about high food prices to these people 
who are supporting the agitations and that too at a time when we have paid 
far greater attention to the problems of the farmern and are giving better 
prices 

to them than they have received ever before. 

QUEST~ON : With the consumer prices still rising, industrial production 
lagging behind and the budgetary deficit 
threatening to overshot the set 
limit, will the new year bring any relief to the common man? 

PRIME MINISTER ; I don't think consumer prices are rising. 

QUESTION : . They are high. 

· PR~ME MINISTER : The wholesale prices are definitely coming down: What is 
interesting to note is that when food prices go up, the newspapers play it 
up with large headlines on the front page. But when they come down, as 
they have now, then a tiny little news item appears, like it did the other day, 
in an obscure corner of page four. It was a little one column announcement 
of about one square inch saying prices were coming down. It was precisely 
that much-I measured it. 

QUESTION : In all the newspapers? 

PR~ME MINISTER : Well, I saw it in only one, the others did not mention 
it at all. 

QUESTION : What paper was that? 

PRIME MIN~STER ; I don't remember the name now but I can get hold of it. 

QUESTiON : Was it ours? 

PRIME M~ISTER : Yours probably did not mention it at all, which is much 
worse. 

QUESTlON : Most of the public sector projects are not doing well. In fact, 
they are said to be a drag on the country's progress. 

It is not correct to say 
PRIME MIN~STER : Some of them are not doing well. 
that most of them are not doing well. 75 out of 143 are making a profit and 

the losses incurred by many of the others are now very much reduced. As 
you know, products of the public sector enterprises were deliberately priced 
low at one time Now w~ are trying to be a bit more realistic. 

QUESTION : The profits are very small, there are no worthwhile returns. l 
am told Rs 19,000 crore have been invested in them while the profits are· 
only Rs 500 crore or so. 

PRIME MINISTER : The basic thing is not the profits. The important thing is 
to produce things which we need even though they may not be profitable 
· for a long time to come. As a result of this undue concern for profits, we 
have lost a lot. I favoured intensive research in solar energy a long time ago 
but everybody said that this would not be profitable. Had we done it at 
that time, we would have been at a great advantage today. But the opinfon 
everywhere was that the effort would be far too expensive and again it would 
. be said that the public sector wa~ losing money. So you se~ we have to look 
much ahead. 

QtJESTION ; But we are not self-sufficient even in items in which we should 
have been-like cement and steel. 

PRIME MINISTER : We were in my time. We were even exporting cement and 
steel. These shortages have come about during the Janata period. 

You talk of the public sector, but I would like to reu,jnd you that there 
are a large number of private units which are becoming sick one after aT.J.other 
although their owners have made huge profits both during our time as 
well as during the Janata rule. So, it is a bit unfair to single out the public 
sector. 

QUESTION : Many of the senior posts have not been filled with the result that 
there is malfunctioning and poor management of some units. 

PRIME MINISTER : No. that is not true. The posts have been filled. But 
sometimes it is not easy to find the right person for a particular job. In some 
cases some people, who were doing specific jobs and doing them well, had 
been sent away by the Janata, some of them abroad. Now, it is not easy to 
get them back. Even if the person is willing to leave his job, give up the 
higher salary he earns, the better facilities he enjoys and return to us, he 
cannot do so overnight. It will take time. But no post is actually vacant. 
There are certain positions where people may be holding acting charge. 
That does not mean that the work is suffering. 

QUESTiON : What about the industrial relations? 

DEMOCRACY AND NAT~ONAL STRENGTH 

· PRIME MINISTER: Yes, one of the big problems is the labour situation. The 
opposition is not co-operating. Some of the unions· are deliberately creating 
trouble. For instance, the situation may be the same in two States, but they 
make certain demands in one State and not in another. 

QuESTtoN: Would you then say that there is no problem of poor manage-
ment in the public sector undertakings? 

PRIME MINISTER : No, that is not so. There is poor management in some 
but not to the extent it is being made out. 

What I would like to put to you is that the private sector has the so-

called best management where they pay far higher salaries than we could 
ever pay. Why are their units not functioning well? Why are they getting 
sick? And why are they wanting to foist them on us? 

QUEST~ON : In a number of neighbouring countries, the rate of growth has 
. been impressive, One of the reasons is the encouragement given by the · 
government to the private sector. 
Is that hot a proper approach for India 
as well? And, is your ·aoveniment moving iii that direction? 

PRTME MINISTER : We have also tried to simplify the licensing procedure, 
etc., to help the private sector to produce more. But my experience is that 
the more you try to help them, the more they try to squeeze you and get 
more out of you. 

QUESTION : Can we not allow those who can produce more to go ahead 
and do it? 

PRIME MINISTER : We are doing precisely that. 

QUESTION : The Lawyers Conference held .in New Delhi last month has 
given rise to a controversy as to whether we need to change our system of 
government. While inauguratirigthe conference, you asked for a national 
debate on the subject. The Opposition has mounted a campaign against you 
saying that you wish to switch to the Presidential system of government. 
It is being said that the Congress (I) leaders who are advocating the Presi-
dential system are only voicing your views. 

PRIME MINISTER : I would not like to comment on this matter for the simple 
reason that, if those who make these charges do not believe what I say, 
there is no point in my saying anything. I have made it very clear that I 
did not initiate the debate. I did not initiate it when this subject had 
cropped up earlier. In fact, if I am not_ mistaken, it was Mr. Jayaprakash 

Narayan who raised this issue in 1974 or so. 
leaders also wanted to switch to the Presidential system. 

'Some other opposition 

QUEST{ON : Mr Nani Palkhiwala, · for example. 

PRIME MINISTER : Some of the . big business people were advocating it. 1 
did. not react to it-neither for it nor against it-because I felt it was for the 
people to decide. 

Recently, some people came to me and suggested that we should let 
our people know more about different forms of government. Among them, 
some were in favour of a change in the system and some against. 

That is why I said that let us have a debate. The people should also 
know the difficulties inherent in the Presidential system. After all, that too 
is not an ideal system. Again, there is not one Patliamenfary system or 
Presidential system. They differ from one country to another. I, therefore, 
felt that it would be worthwhile if the discussions could begin at the level 
of the intellectuals-then it could go down to other levels. What is wrong 
in asking for a debate? Any objection to it is a sign of irrationality . and 
. · irresponsib1Iity of thinking, or shall we say lack of thinking: Su:rely, it cannot 
be the contention of these Opposition leaders that debate and discussions 
are undemocratic. 

QUEST~ON : Your critics charge that many of your ministers both at the 
Centre and in the States ruled by the Congress (I) have not measured up to 
the job. 

PRIME MINISTER : And would those people, who feel so, tell me who are 
more competent? Would they like to be ministers? 

QUEsT~ON : It is said that your ministers are not able to hold their own even 
in Parliament. 

PRIME MINISTER : Everybody cannot be a good speaker. That is no criterion 
for judging the competence of a minister. We have to see how well his minis-
try functions. When one is new to one's job, it takes one time to settle down 
to it. I must say that most of the ministers have acquired a grip over their 
problems very quickly. Many people, who are neither in the Government 
nor in my party, have told me that they were surprised how quickly and how 
well our ministers had become acquainted with their jobs. 

We also have a problem because in our system we cannot select the 
man most suited for a job. We have to choose ministers from among the 
elected members. 

QUESTION : You can take experts from outside. 

PRIME MINISTER: No, not as ministers. 

QUESTION : Through the Rajya Sabha. 

PRIMB MINISTER : It is not easy to get people into the Rajya Sabha. They 
have to get elected to the Rajya Sabha. And, no assembly is willing to accept 
an outsider. 

Apart from that, in a country such as ours, there are other considera-

tions-the various regions and interests to be represented. 

In any case, this is not a legitimate criticism on the part of those who are 
opposed to me. It is a deliberate attempt to discredit my Government. And, 
if I may say so, it smacks of a little bit of dishonesty. What about the people 
who are making these charges? What has been their assessment of other 
their assessn1ents in the past 
situations 
been valuable or correct? 

and other matters? Have 

In the last election, most of them were convinced that I would not even get 
a clear majority; One could .accept thejudgement of people who have proved 
correct Hut these critici.; of mine have not at any time been proved right. 
.. I would be very glad to know .if you could point out one or two instances 
when their assessment or judgement was valid. Contrary to that, I can cite 
hundreds of examples of their being entirely off the track. 

QUEST\ON : Do you think you have been able to provide a 'government that 
works' as promised by you during the election? 

PRIME MINISTER : lf it was not working, how have we controlled inflation, 
how have we started increasing production, how have w~ produced a Plan 
which the Janata could not do in three years? Their Plan kept on l'olling until 
it just rolled away. And we have achieved all 
there 
in three States-and a very virulent 
being Opposition governments 
opposition. 

this despite 

QUESTION : It is generally believed that among the civil servants at the 
Centre, there is a great deal of uncertainty with the result that administration 
is paralysed. 

PRIME MINISTER : There is no paralysis of the administration at all. But it is 
true that the administration was extremely demoralised during the Janata 
rule because a lot of appointments were made either on a political or caste 
basis. As a result, several excellent officials were shunted off to various 
places. Now, if an officer is not inefficient or corrupt, he has no reason to 
feel insecure. We have assured them that we are not going to be vindictive. 
. We will.not shift them or remove them merely because they have their 

fl'.' ' ' 

sympathies with the Janata Party or anyone else. But.we have to take note 
of complaints relating to their performance. 

If an official continues to be influenced by political considerations even 
now, we cannot possibly let him remain where he is because he has to 
implement the policies for which the country. has voted. 

It is one of the basic points of the British system which we have adopted 
that the civil servants must not involve themselves in party politics. The 
Janata changed all this. Now, it is creating a lot of problems. 

QUEST~ON : But the large-scale transfers-would they not demoralise the 
bureaucracy? 

PRIME MINJ;STER : Where are the large-scale transfers? Not at the Centre. 
I am sorry to say that some of the State governments are doing it, but we 
certainly are not. 

· QUESTION : It ·has happened in Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Bihar. 

PRIME MINISTER : There were large-scale tnu1sfers d~ring the .Tanata rule·, 
though these were not publicised. We knew about them because those 
officials came to us but we could not get the news into the Press though 
we sometimes brought it to· the attention of the Press. So, if you want· to 
compare what has happened now, you have to compare it with what had 
happened under the Janata. But Ido not think it (transfers) is a good thing. 

QUESTION : Do you agree that the party system in India is crumbling? 

PRIME M~NISTRE : This is because the other parties just do not have a sense 
of responsibility. 
If I had wanted to mount a major agitation during the 
three years I was not in office, do you think I could not have done it? Wh~ther 
it was the farmers; the Harijans, the Muslims, we could have taken up the 
cause of any one of them. We could have brought all of them together. 
But we did not think it advisable to do so in the interest of the country, 
even though these sections of the people were really suffering-which is 
not the case now. 

For instance, if the Harijans are suffering today, it is the legacy of the 
Janata period. They have not got back the land that was then taken away 
from them. Or, some of the officials continue to harass them. So political 
parties · have to act with responsibility if they want the party system to 
prosper. 

QUESTION : In your party too, you are the only cementing force. Apart 
from you, there is no element to provide cohesion. This may work for 
another 10 years. But what then? 

PRIME MINISTER : This has bee11 said about the Congress since 1920. But 
the Congress continues to exist and remains strong and united. We may 
have personality problems and difficulties, but you have seen that at the 
time of crisis it holds together. 

This is mainly because the Congress has always been concerned with 
It has 
larger issues and been committed to the progress of the country. 
proved its capacity for self-renewal and growth. We have also been able 
to attract many bright young people without reducing the importance of 
the older people. 

When my father was ill, the same sort of thing was being said-After 
him, what? But the Congress did manage to find an answer without any 
disruption of the party or the country. 

The commentators, who keep running down our party, should try and 
find out the causes for its survival and strength so far. But the tendency 
these days is to have preconceived notions, to have a closed mind and to 
decicle. that you are against the party: 

QUESTION: In 1969, when the country was going through a crisis, you came 
out with some radical economic 1neasures (bank nationalization, abolition 
of privy purses). Again in 1975, you brought the 20-Point Programme. 
Today, when the situation is equally grim, do you have any such plan of 
action? 

PRIME MINISTER : The plan of action is first to stabilize the country which 
had been destabilized both politically and economically. For, unless the 
ground is firm, you cannot possibly build on it. My own view, which I have 
expressed in so many forums, is that we need a new kind of thinking. For 
instance, take the economic situation, not just in India but all oyer the world. 
The existing approaches have proved inadequate to the demands and needs 
of this age. I am not.an expert in economics but I do feel that we need new 
thinking. 
political people. We have to get. out of the old rut. Today, the Opposition 
is thinking along lines that are not at all relevant. 

I would have welcomed a dialogue with political and non-

Our party also is not running along ideal lines. But, at least, we see 
the need that there should be a breakthrough whereas the Opposition parties 
are constantly wanting to push the country backwards. And, whatever policy 
we adopt, one thing is certain. There is going to be no magic solution. 
A lot of discipline, hard work and, above all, unity of purpose will be required 
if the country is to go ahead. 

Now that we are talking about political parties, I must say that I find it 

very strange when the Jan Sangh talks of following Gandhian socialism. 

QUESTION : There have been voices of dissent now within the Jan Sangh 
itself about it. 

PRIME MINISTER : Yes, but I think they are ridiculing Gandhiji. 

QUESTION : Are you trying to bring in some of the Congress (U) members 
to strengthen your party? 

PRIME MINISTER : My party is much stronger without them. The only 
question that comes up is: when the country as a whole is facing such a 
crisis, should we not get more people involved in our endeavour.to overcome 
it? From that point of view, we say that if anybody wants to come in, we 
should consider it. ·But we have to see to it that the coming in of new entrant 
does not weaken the local unit. 

QUESTION : An impression prevails that you remain critical of the Press. 

PRIME MINISTER : I am critical of everything. I am critical even of myself. 
But the Press has never given me any quarter at all anf time. This is so not 
only since the Emergency. The Press even before that was hostile to 
me. 

QUESTION : But Madam Prime Minister, the Press is not one unified entity. 
It is not a 1nonolith. 

PRIME MINISTER : Well, it is unified against me just as the Opposition is. 
What is common among the CPM, the Naxalites, the RSS? But they 
are united against the Congress. 

QUESTION : Do you lump the entire P~ss toget4er in one category? 

PRIME MINISTER : I do not say that all in the Press are the same; among 
them there are differences of degree. By and large they seem to think that 
freedom of the Press lies only in being anti-Congress. 

QUESTION : Do you feel that they are destructive, not performing theh 
role well? 

PRIME MINISTER : First of all, I would not like to lump the whole Press 
together. There are very many different attitudes, there are different reasons 
for these attitudes. Some are personal, some are political and so on. 

The Western Press started giving sensational news rather than objective 
reports to inform readers on issues and events .. · Our Press has taken to 
that, with the result that they are projecting a very wrong picture of India 
abroad. It is harming us economically and in many other ways. I can tell 
you that I have been to many countries and I know how the Press functions 
there. I don't think any government would permit this. 

And these Press people on their own never bother to go out to see 

things for themselves. At least in foreign countries, there is a lot of on-the-
spot reporting. Here, in India, we do not have that kind of thing at all. 

QUESTION : It is believed that there is a communication gap between you 
and 

the intellectuals. · 

PRIME MINISTER : Who are the intellectuals? Are scientists not intellectuals? 
Are writers not intellectuals? And certainly with the foreign intellectuals 
I have always had a very good rapport-with some of the topmost thinkers 
in any country. 

But here such people are not considered intellectuals. There is another 
class altogether. And, if there is a communication gap, it is not my fault. 
I am accessible to anyone who wants to meet me or to discuss with me. In 
fact;- I welcome . such disucussions. 

. QUESTION : At one stage the prospects of friendly relations with Pakistan 
seemed bright. Since then there has been a set-back. 

PRIME MINISTER : Is that not linked with what is happening internationally? 
There has been a set-back to detente as a whole. Pakistan has had a tilt in 
one direction and it has never given it up. 

The Press kept on saying that relations had improved. The Janata 
Party kept saying the same. The Pakistan Government kept on saying it. 
But what happened in reality? It was during the Janata days that Pakistan 
first started raising the issue of Kashmir once again and some other issues 
as well. How was the i::elationship better except that the Press projected it 
that way? 

QUESTION : Do you see any prospects of improvement in the future? 

PRIME MINISTER : We will continue to work for friendship because we feel 
it is essential for the strengthening of the entire region and not just India 
and Pakistan. And, with interference by foreign powers increasing in the 
Indian Ocean and in this region, it is much 1nore important that we two 
neighbours stand together rather than get embroiled in their matters. 

QUESTION : Reports in the Western media suggest that Pakistan is going 
ahead with its plan to manufacture nuclear weapons. 

PRIME MINISTER : I can only say that Pakistan keeps denying it. 

QUESTION : Our relations with Cliina seem to be -stagnating at a non-
hostility no-friendship level. How do you propose to make a breakthrough? 

PRIME MINISTER : Today, China is also very much dependant on the West 
for economic help. Our newspapers as welLas the Western Press had been 
telling us all along how much more progress China had made as compared 
to us. And, now we find that much of the ground has been knocked out . 
of that argument. As long as China is dependant on the West, its attitude 
will remain so. And then, of course, it is obsessed with the animosity against 
the Soviet Union as the Soviet Union is similarly obsessed in relation to 
China. We are no more pro-Soviet than we are pro-anybody else. But 
anyone who helps us in our hour of need, surely we cannot ignore that help 
or denigrate them. 

We are doing our best; we have sent a good ambassador there (China). 
And without being chauvinistic, I would say that it is high time Asia got 
together . 

. · It is in the interest of others that Asia does not unite because all the 
tensions of Europe are being transferred to Asia; Wars which had to be 
· fought · in Europe are deliberately being implanted on Asian soiL. Not 
that I am for any wars there-I an1 against wars and I feel that things 
should be settled by negotiations and not by fighting. But they are trying 
to keep us fighting and disunited. 

QUESTION : It is being said 
in certain circles that, with the visit of 
Mr Brezhnev, we have moved closer to Soviet positions in this region; that 
there is a tilt towards the Soviet Uniori. 

PRIME MINISTER : Our information from most of the bigger countries has 
been to the ~ontrary .. They feel it was an important visit. The importance 
of the visit was seen by them from the beginning. That is why everybody 
was watching it. The general in1pression is that we held our ground. 

QUESTION : You do not feel it would affect our position in the non-aligned 
world. 

PRIME MINISTER : On the contrary, it has greatly strengthened it. Who 
else is non-aligned, I would like to know? Very, very few countries. But if 
you call the Janata kind of policy non-aligned, then, it is a different n1atter. 
But I don't. The Janata Government was very definitely aligned. That is 
why our position weakened in international affairs, not only with 
non-aligned countries but with others as well. 

QUESTION : It has been reported that Mr B.K. Nehru carried a letter from 
you to Mr Reagan whicu has had a positive response. Would you consider 
this a good beginning in the Indo-US relations during Mr Reagan's term of 
office ? 

PRIME MINISTER : I would not have made it if I did not consider it to be a 
good beginning. 

You see, I did not send Mr Nehru there. 

I came to know that he was 
going to the United Nations for one of his normal meetings. He is on a number 
of UN committees. So, I thought that since he was going to the United 
States, he could meet as many people as possible. And he has a large circle 
of friends and so many contacts. He was our ambassador in Washington 
for several years and has held other offices abroad. 

Now, some people, the same people who are trying to denigrate us, 
have started saying that by such an action we were devaluing our ambassador. 
It was not at all so. Whatever was done was done through the ambassador. 
But the ambassador has taken charge recently, he is new there and 
Mr Nehru meets people as a personal friend and not as an envoy . 

. I had said that, if it was possible to meet the top people, he should 

make an effort. We are glad that he succeeded. 

QUESTION : What are the outstanding issues in Indo-US relations on the eve · 
of the Reagan administration taking over in Washington? 

PRIME MINISTER : We have no outstanding issues with them except perhaps 
the second instalment of Tarapur fuel. But the basic problem is their 
perception of India's needs and interests. Unfortunately, most of the 
administration there, of whichever party, have not approved of our having 
an independent foreign policy. Some of them have even admitted of a 
tilt against India. So, we can only try to see and hope that they revise this 
attitude. 

No two countries can agree on everything. But we should find out 
what co-operation there can be and try to strengthen it. That is the basis 
of friendship. Non-alignment itself means that you do try and have a 
friendship regardless of the other counti:y's system or other matters on which 
we may not agree with it. 

QUEST~ON : Your frequent visits to temples have got some to say that you 
have not only become deeply religious but also very superstitious. 

PR~ME MINISTER : First, who is not superstitious in one way or another? 
For there are many types of superstitions. 
I do not kuow anyoue iu the 
West who is not superstitious. They have different superstitions. But, 
I think, among the people I know in various categories, I can say I am the 
least superstitious. 

QUESTION : Your swearing in ceremouy is cited as an example when 
you postponed it by four or five days in order to have it on an auspicious 

PRIME M~NISTER : That had nothing to do with any superstition of mine. 
I do not recall the reason for it now but it was certainly not because of any 
superstition. 

Besides, I don't think temple-going has anything to do with superstition. 
Millions of people have faith in something. I don't think you can try and 
convince them that they are wrong or it is not strengthening them. 

Religion is something very basic and it is timeless. In this country, it is 
a great experience to go to some of the temples and see the people who come 
It 
to worship there. 
is not only the faith of these people but of all the others who have been 
coming here for thousands of years. 

It is their faith that creates a special atmosphere. 

I don't really go to temples unless someone says he has made a promise 
to take me there. It is so difficult to say 'no' to them. Apart from it, many 
of the temples are architecturally so beautiful that it is a pleasure to visit 
them. 

QUESTION : The communal situation seems to have remained· the same as · · · 
before. People, especially Muslims, had believed that there would be no 
riots once you returned to power. 

PRIME MINISTER : Frankly, I too believed so. But these things are not in 
our hands. There are still certain groups 
in our country which are 
It is not that they want riots. Moradabad could have 
communal-minded. 
been controlled if it bad not been made political. 

QUESTION : By some of the opposition? 

PRIME MINISTER : Well, there were some in our party too. They did not 
make the issue political as some Opposition members did, but, then we 
found that their attitude in this regard was not right, we had to take imme-
diate action against tliem and we did that. 

Some people feel that they are being true friends of the minorities if 
they keep talking of what is happening or not happening. This is all right 
during normal thnes. But when the situation is tense, such statements are 
counter-productive to the other community. There is a danger that it will 
react. One has to be careful about what one says or does. 

Some people criticised me for not going to Moradabad immediately. 
But I do not go to a place of communal riots immediately because the 
authorities feel, rightly or wrongly, that both sides want me to come and 
air their grievances. And, in a surcharged atmosphere, this can spark off 
It is 
further trouble. So, I feel it is better to avoid any such possibility. 
too big a risk to take. However, I sent others from my party. 
, QUESTION : What about the thne when you were out of office-was it a 
different matter then? 

DEMOCRACY AND NAT~ONAL STRENGTH· 

PRIME MINISTER : Even then I did not go to a place where there was a com-
munal riot. Because immediately there is a sharp division between two 
communities. 

QUESTION : Are you planning to revamp the Youth Congress after Sanjay's 
death? 

PRIME MINISTER : It is for the Youth Congress to revamp itself if it wants 
to. I am not interfering. 

Initially they went through a traumatic experience, but they are finding 
their feet. They had a very good programme on Sanjay's birthday. 
It 
It was, 
was not limited only to Delhi but encompassed the whole country. 
I was told, very good everywhere. They are.also taking up other programmes 
but those don't get any publicity. Only this morning, some of them came 
to me saying that 'you had asked us to stick to constructive programmes 
but people feel w_e are doing nothing'. 

QUESTION : There is a lot of talk about your son Rajiv helping you. 

PRIME MINISTER : Well, he helps me non-politically so far. 

State of the Nation 
A DISCUSSION ON a subject as serious as the President's Address is not 
an occasion merely to score debating points, although that also is a part of 
parliamerrtary life. 
It is an occasion to look seriously at the problems 
It seemed to me, while I was listening to the speeches, 
confronting us. 
. that, except in a few, there was a singular lack of a sense of urgency and of 
any attempt to fathom the increasing complexity of national and global 
issues. Some Members admitted to have boycotted the Address. Frankly, 
I doubt whether they took the trouble of reading it very carefully even after-
wards. One Member complained that there was no reference to the uplift 
of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. Obviously, he had 
missed para 16. 

People are naturally most concerned about the economic situation, 
so are we. Increased prices hit all the people, especially the average citizens, 
but more especially the housewives, the women and the poor and middle 

Reply to debate on the Motion of Thanks to President's Address, Rajya Sabha, 
February 25, 1981 

class people. What is the total picture? The seventies were a decade of 
inflation and general stagnation of output and employment all over the 
world: In our previous regime we had dealt effectively with these problems 
Even when the Indian economy was crippled by failures of power and the 
sudden rise in international prices of petroleum products and other imports, 
we did succeed in stabilizing our economy. While other countries were 
staggering under high rates of inflation, we were able to bring down the 
prices and to maintain a steady, rapid growth. 

I know that people get rather bored with figures, but I must mention 
some of them. In the years 1969 to 1974, i.e., the Fourth Plan, the average 
rate of growth of national income was 3.4 per cent. 
In 1974 to 1977, it 
In 1975-76, in fact, it was 9.6 per cent, according to the 
was 4.1 per cent. 
Economic Survey. 
In the years 1977 to 1980, it came down to 3.3 per cent. 
in 1979-80, it was minus 4.5 per cent. 
One Hon.· Me111ber quoted the World Bank report relating to the fiscal 
years 1976 to 1979 .. · This dearly indicates lack of understanding of the· 
meaning of the term 'fiscal period 1976-79' because. in the World Bank 
parlance, this includes two years-1975-76 and 1976-77, and also 1977-78 
and 1978-79. Of these, the highest growth rate was in 1975-76; it was 9.6 
per cent. Also in 1979-80, there was an actual fall in GNP by about 4.5 
per cent, as a little while ago. 

I am repeating it to make it clear. 

In spite of the difficulties as a result of the Bangladesh war, the acute 
drought leading to harvest failure, the unexpected sharp rise in petroleum 
products and steep increase in our cost of imports by 1974-75, we were able, 
through right policies and tremendous effort and even unpopular decisions, 
to give a proper balance to the management of our economy. Let us 
compare the results of our policies for the years 1974 to 1977 with the results 
of the policies of the Janata Party/Lok Dal Governments for 1977 to 1980. 
Here are some figures, given in percentages : 

G.N.P. (at 1970-71 prices) Annual 
Food Production 
Indul>tial Production 
Export (at the current prices) 
Index of the Agricultural Production 
Foreign exchange reserves ( excluding gold 
& SDRs) 
Wholesale price Index (with 1970-71=100, 
on point to point basis) 
Consumer price Index (with 1960=100) 
March to March basis 

Growth Rate 

DEMOCRACY·AND NATIONAL STRENGTH 

I do not want to keep on harping on the failures of the Janata Party 
and the Lok Dal Governments. But some facts have to be restated because 
of the statements made from the other side. A distressing but inescapable 
fact is that the infrastructure was allowed to run to seed. I shall quote some 
more figures which bear this out : 

Electricity generation (Utilities only) 
Production of coal and lignite 
Railway traffic (in tonne km) 
Production of finished steel 

Growth Rate 
(in percentage) 

We are not complacent, as several Opposition Members tried to make. 
out. We do realise that we have a long way to go. The world situation is not 
. easy, and we are fully conscious. that we have increasingly to depend on 

our own sources-and technologies. Hon. Members are aware ofmy personal • 
concern and of our strenuous efforts.to harnessfenewable sources of energy_ 
for use in agriculture as well as in industry. 

The Sixth Plan itself is a proof of the correctness of our direction. 

It 
sets out our goals within the limits of our financial and other constraints. 
Some Members have tried to compare this with the Janata Party's so-called 
It was rolled up like 
Plan. That, I am afraid, was a Plan that never was. 
the old bedding rolls that we used to have. Neither the Janata Government 
nor the Lok Dal Government gave their approval to it. Is this not sufficient 
evidence that the sponsors themselves had no faith in it? 

Now I come to industry. The improvement in the infrastructure is now 
slowly reflecting itself in higher industrial productivity. Vital sectors are 
showing increased utilization of the installed capacity and industrial labour 
has also responded positively. 

The number of man-days lost on account of labour problems in 1978 
was 28.34 millions; in 1979, it was 43.87 millions; in 1980-of course, this 
figure is provisional-12.91 millions. 
I must admit that now there seems 
to be an increasing resort to strikes and "go slow" movement. This 
favourable environment in labour relations has been ,ought to be vitiated 
in some areas by interested parties intent on misguiding labour to serve 
I can only sincerely hope that politicians will not feel 
their own ends. 
tempted to try to reverse the healthy trend, and that the responsible sections 
of labour leadership will not allow themselves to be taken in, and will co-
operate in arriving at constructive solutions that are in the long-term interests 
of the workers themselves as well as of our nation. Unless the economy 
prospers, no section can do welJ even if they do get a temporary advantage. 

I do not· normally like to get involved in these controversies between 
I think this has been overdone. 
the public sector and the private sector. 
But how does it help for some people to continue to decry the public sector 
and its performance? When the Government has been committed to the 
public sector and has encouraged it, the public sector has performed well, 
as it did during 1974 to 1977. However, in the Janata Party and Lok Dal 
period, there was a marked deterioration. The average pre-tax profit in 
the public sector undertakings in 1974-77 was Rs. 346 crore; in 1977-80, 
Rs. 190 crore. Of course, it is yet to re-attain the vitality necessary to come 
up to our expectations. 

An Hon. Member alleged that the Plan does not refer to land reforms. 
On the contrary, it lays down 
in no uncertain terms our commitment to 
various land reform policies and measures to implement them. It is 
ridiculous and untrue to allege that we are not concerned with the welfare 
of our farmers. The base of our party has been and is-the base of.our 
country-our farmers. Unless they get facilities, India cannot prosper. 
But the ~gricultural ancl. industrial sectors are closely interlinked. Each is 
dependant on the other. Without a strong industrial base, we cannot help . • 
the rural areas or the poorer sections .. Also, let us not forget that the better-
off people cannot be secure unless and until the weaker sections are streng-
thened. Agriculturists and industrialists should see their problems in the 
context of the wider national scene. And the same applies, of course, to 
other sections of our people. 

When we came back to Government, we were faced with an unprece-
dented drought for which the previous Government had done precious little. 
We initiated immediately vigorous action at the Central and State levels to 
minimise the hardships of the farming community and specially of the 
agricultural workers. Even during this year, certain regions are in the grip 
of severe drought. However, as a result of the measures taken, including 
supply of inputs, fixation of better prices, etc., there is indication of a 
record foodgrains output this year. I am told it will be about 132 million 
tonnes. 

The law and order situation also has a history. The agitation of the 
Opposition parties towards the end of my previous regime had already 
weakened the national fabric and eroded civil authority. This was followed 
by the Janata Party Government which gave free rein to those whose anti-
social activities we had checked. At the same time, not only was disregard 
for authority brought in and casteism injected in a big way, affecting even 
some sections of the police, but regrettably, those arms of the Government, 
in our system of government should be non-political, were 
which 
politicised. 

Even now, while Governments at the Centre and in the States have taken 
steps to curb lawlessness, some political parties are busy in encouraging each 

DEMOCRACY AND NAT~ONAL STRENGTH 

and every agitation regardless of the disharmony created or the tensions 
generated. 

The arousing of communal passions gave rise to insecurity among· 
minorities. And by minorities I do not mean only the Muslims. 
In various 
areas, other communities are minorities. Then there are minorities who 
.are based on the language they speak. Having said this, I wish to make it 
clear that I share the concern of Hon. Members about the problems of the 
minorities as well as the general law and order situation. We regard protec-
tion of the minorities as a national responsibility. The National Integration 
Council has been revived and we hope that those, who have chosen to stay 
out of its deliberations and those of its committees; will eventually come in 
and help in fostering peace and amity among different sections of our 
people. 

Some Hon. Members complain that the Government has refused to 
co-operate with the Opposition in solving the Assam problem. This is a 
fantastic statement. If there is one issue on which the Government has been 
all the time consulting . the Opposition, either collectively or sepanitely, it 
is the Assam issue. · Unfortunately, even here, some opposition p·arties have . 
openly supported the continuance of an agitation which has caused immense . 
su..•fering to all sections of the people of Assam and the.North-East, especially 
the weakest and the economically most backward of our plain and hill tribals. 
Even the steps wJ,jch the agitators want cannot be taken because of this 
obstruction. We have shown great understanding and patience in dealing 
with this problem. Unfortunately, this attitude has not been reciprocated 
by those who are responsible for the agitation. Some elements seem to be 
resorting to bomb attacks and other acts of terrorism now. Can a Govern-
ment remain a silent spectator when such incidents take place? We are trying 
and shall· continue to try to find out a lasting solution to the foreigners' 
problem which would be acceptable to all sections of the people. This. 
can only be through discussions and consultations in an atmosphere free: 
from violence and distrust. We have said on many occasions, privately, 
publicly and in different forums, that we are always prepared to continue 
such discussions. 

The situation in Gujarat has caused me deep pain and anguish. 

It . 
is tragic that the State, which gave birth to Mahatma Gandhi, should now 
witness these deplorable incidents. We have the moral obligation as well 
as the constitutional responsibility to advance the educational interests of 
the weaker sections of our society and, in particular, the Scheduled Castes 
and the Scheduled Tribes. Here also, it is a pity that some political parties 
seem to be instigating the students and others to create confrontation where 
none need exist. We hope that saner elements will prevail and end this ill-
If the weaker sections in this country are to take their 
advised agitation. 
rightful place in society; we must accelerate the process of their economic 
and social advancement. A highpowered panel is already going into this 

ct;. I i 

a • ~, l I 

matter. But, naturally, we must ensure that merit does not suffer and no 
section feels that it is being discriminated against. 

them 

An Hon. Member spoke about women. I hesitate to speak on women 
lest I be accused of partiality. But our leaders have all agreed on the 
importance of helping 
to . be equal partners and sharers, 
because otherwise no plans can be properly implemented and the nation 
itself cannot rise. The National Plan of Action for Women serves as a 
guideline to the Central and State Governments. Measures seeking to 
amend the laws relating to rape and dowry are before Committees of 
Parliament. They need careful 
thought and detailed consider-ation which, 
I ain sure, the Members on those Committees and other Hon. Members 
will give them. 

A progiamme of special relevance to women fa the family planning 
programme. After the disastrous set-back that thit. programme suffered 
in the period since 1977, it has begun to pick up some little mom.entum. 
It is my firm belief that our people, especially our women, even in the rural 
areas, do want family planning as an important means of improving the quality .. 
.It is as much 
of their life and giving better opportunities to their cl:uldren. 
in the interest of individual families as in the national interest. 
In fact, · 
we have always used this programme not merely from the point of view of 
population control, but in order to have healthier and happier families. 

Just as strengthening and rectifying the distortions in our economy 
and in our political system, we are also bringing our foreign policy back 
on to the track of non-alignment. A movement which was regarded as 
divided and weak is once more starting to consolidate its position. This 
is reflected in the perceptions of the countries all over the world. We seek 
no leadership. We believe in the co-operative effort of working together 
in partnership with others. This is what has brought us success and 
appreciation for our efforts in the chancelleries of the world.. The recently 
concluded Non-aligned Conference and the earlier CHOGRM meeting 
were applauded for our balanced and constructive approach. 
I wonder 
how those who criticised this Conference have so soon forgotten the 
disastrous performance of the Lok Dal delegation 
to the earlier 
Commonwealth Conference in Lusaka or the back seat taken in Havana. 

However, we have now to look to the future rather than to the past. 
Our aim should be to create a strong and self-reliant India which will secure 
the well-being of our people and maintain our standing and prestige abroad. 
In this task, we need and seek the co-operation of every section of our 
people and I hope that it will be forthcoming in good measure from all 
parties. 

Hon. Members, if I have criticised some aspects of the previous 
Government, it is not for the sake of criticism or, as I said earlier, for scoring 
I have no 
points. 
desire to waste time or energy in mutual recri.minations. 

It is only to clarify the issues raised by the other side. 

There is time for everything and this is certainly a tinie for working · 

together. We have definite· policies which have stood the test of time. 
By "we" I mean our party. We are open to new ideas and suggestions. 

The world is in the grip of crises, economic, social and even possibly 
cultural. There is a crisis of civilization, as every leader who has visited 
here or whom I have had the opportunity of meeting, whet1'er in Salisbury 
or in Belgrade, has said. 
In this situation, which every country is facing, 
the burdens and difficulties of a poorer country, a country which is already 
economically backward and has much leeway to make up, become naturally 
all the heavier. So, let us discuss matters calmly and coolly and try to solve 
the problems and difficulties in a spirit of nationalism. 

We live in a great country. We have the good fortune to have a 

wonderful people. Let us try to be worthy of them. 

Sir, I commend the Motion of Thanks to the President. 

STATE OF THE NATION-2 

MR .. SPEAKER, SIR, I-am somewhat in a dilemma. I had hoped to avoid any 
kind of recrimination and repetition of the comparisons which so upset 
and excite the Hon. Members of the Opposition. But the tenor of many of 
their remarks, the quoting of :figures out of context-the Hon. Member who 
launched the attack seemed to attach almost scriptural significance to a 
particular document-these leave me no choice but to refer to that period. 
But I assure you, Sir, and the House that I do so without any bitterness or 
any feeling of satisfaction. 
I do not seek alibis nor do I wish needlessly to 
irritate anyone. 

I hope this is not according to some plan of theirs. 

We have also been accused of depleting f9reign exphange reserves. 
May I remind Hon. Members that in 1966 the pos'.ition was really bad. Our 
reserves started accumulating from 1975 onwards, in a big way, mainly due 
to bigger export efforts in the earlier years and increases in remittances from 
Indians abroad. But the reserves are not built for their own sake. They 
give us a cushion to manage the balance of payments problem, and should 
be used when necessary to :finance imports, especially, when they rise sharply, 
as in this year, because of the increase in the prices of POL products. The 
figures for POL imports are as follows-1978-79: Rs 1,677 crore; 1980-81: 
Rs 5,600 crore (estimated). Against this increase in imports of about 
Rs 4,000 crore for only one item, our draw-down of foreign currency assets 
is expected to be about Rs 400 crore. 

For a country's growth, the infrastructure is of utmost importance. A 
sad but inescapable fact is that the infrastructure, including the public sector, 

Reply to debate on the Motion of Thanks to President's Address, Lok Sabha, 
February 26, 1981 

SBLECTBD SPEECHES AND WRITINGS OF INDIRA' GANDHI 

was carelessly neglected. The following is the position. The growth rate in 
electricity generation,in utilities only, in 1974-77 was 9.8 per cent; in 1977-80, 
· it went down to 5.9 per cent. The growth rate of production of coal and 
lignite, which was 8.8 per cent in 1974~ 77, went down to 0.6 per cent in 
1977-80. The growth rate in railway traffic in tonne kilometres was 9.6 per 
cent in 1974-77, which went down to 0.2 per cent in 1977-80. The growth. 
rate in production of finished steel was 15.6 per cent in 1974-77, which went 
down to minus 4.6 per cent in 1977-80. This is from the Economic Survey. 
Its 
working has improved and we expect it to overcome the inertia of 1979°80 
and do as well and even better than in the period of 1974-77. The average 
pre-tax profit of public sector undertakings in 1974-77 was Rs 346 .crore. 
In 1977-80, it went down to Rs 190 crore. 

In our scheme of things, the public sector has a special place. 

I am glad that industrial labour has responded positively to the measures 
· we have taken. so far. The number of man~days lost on account of labour 
problems in 1978 was 28 .. 34 million; in 1979 it increased to 43.87 million; 
the· provisional figure for 1980 is 12.91 million. Attempts . are also . 
being i;nade to misguide labour and to vitiate the favourable industrial 
relations situation. 
the responsible sections of labour 
leadership not to allow themselves to be misled but help us to serve 
the long-term interest of workers, which lies in increased production and in 
a sound and stable economy. 

·I appeal 

to 

Family planning is indeed very vital for the whole world, and specially 
It is in this area that we have had the most crippling 
in our circumstances. 
1,et-back in the last year. Our party and Government have never advocated 
compulsory methods, and we have considered the programme not merely 
as a measure of population.control but for healthier families and the general 
well-being of the people. One f.!on. Member said, and I fully agree with 
him, that this programme not onfy needs all out effort by the Government 
but full co-operation of all the sections of the people, regardless of party 
or other considerations. 

A rather feeble effort was made to project that outlays on science and 
technology were poor compared to what the Janata Party Government 
had provided. Of course, this was a Plan, as I said yesterday, that never 
was, because it was not approved by anybody. However, Government will· 
continue its efforts to .find a solution acceptable to all concerned. 

There was understandable disquiet regarding feelings of insecurity 
amongst minorities. My party and I have always stood for those who are 
weaker, either economically, socially or because of numbers. Hence, we 
are committed to the protection of minorities whether religious or linguistic. 
Yesterday, a Member told a story about the Hindi language, how somebody 
had spoken it in Bombay : ~ ll'Tcl'T ~ l:l'T 
'5!9Toi ~-arT<l'a ~ l 
It is the language spoken in my part of U.P. But it reminded me of a 
It is ari · old, old story, pre-independence story. Two 
similar story. 

,;fTcfT t ? 

DEMOCRACY AND NATONAL STRENGTH 

Englishmen who were learning Urdu had discussion among themselves. 
One said that this is a tashtri. The other said, "No, no, my teacher 
has said it is a rakabi. '' So, they said, "Let us call the bearer and ask him. 
They called the bearer and he said : "~, ~+f 
<:TT ~lcFfiT c~e <li~~ ~" 
(Sir, we call it a plate). 

One of the measures to foster communal harmony is the revival of 
National Integration Council. Even though some persons refuse to join 
the Council, we hope that its deliberations will lead to useful results. 

Yesterday, I heard there was criticism of my trip to Shravanbelagola. 
I went to Gomateshwara to pay homage to one of the great streams of 
Indian thought which has made deep impact on our history, on our culture 
and even on the methods adopted in our freedom struggle. Hon. Members 
know that Gandhiji was influenced by this and the whole idea of non-
violence, non-possession and so on. 

Members are rightly exercised over the agitation in Gujarat. 

It is 
· most distressing. My heartfelt sympathy is with aU those who suffer, and 
. specially because those who -are suffering are the weakest of our people. 
It is deplorable that some political parties are encouraging people to persist 
in this ill-advised 1novement. The Government have moral obligation 
and constitutional responsibility to advance the educational interests of the 
weaker sections of our society and, in particular, the Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes. And we must and we intend to discharge this responsibility 
in full measure. Naturally, we must see that merit does not suffer and that 
no section feels discriminated against. 
I hope that the more responsible 
sections of the society will help bring about an early restoration of peace. 
One Member made an astonishing remark about my Government's 
interference in educational institutions. Now, the troubles in these bodies 
have been started by some Opposition parties meddling with students or 
terrorising the staff.: It is in States run by one of these parties that there is 
real interference on a big scale to the detriment of the effectiyi;: functioning 
of prestigious institutions-Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics and the Bose 
Institute. 

The non-performance or the mis-performance of the Janata Party 
and the Lok Dal Governments is not hidden. Much of it was admitted by 
the Hon. Members of the Opposition themselves at that time as well as later. 
These debates are always interesting, not only for the ideas expressed but 
for the measure one has of the speakers. 
I have listened to many of the 
speeches but not all. Apart from a few, there was more sound and fury 
than. substance. From our side, several Hon. Members made spirited 
defence and many of the points made by the Opposition were well answered. 
This makes my task much easier. 

I was amazed to hear an extraordinary statement accusing us of making 
the President express our views. The President's Address has to reflect 
the policies and perception of the Government in power. That happens 

to be the constitutional position. It isridiculous to say that we have brought 
the Preside~t within the pale of controversy. The President's Add1ess, it 
is recognized, is a policy document of the Government. Had it been the 
statement, Hon. Members would not be introducing 
President's own 
amendments. 

An astounding and nonJensical theory was propounded that Shri 
Charan Singh's Government was our creation. Nothing can be farther from 
the truth. We have protested strongly that- he had no claim to form a 
Government at that time. When we resigned in 1977, we left the house in 
a good condition. It was harmonious in the sense that the law and order 
situation was satisfactory. The communal ;..ituation, while not what we 
desired, seemed to be under control. The grain godowns were overflowing 
and the foreign exchange reserves were excellent. · But what did we find on 
return? The intervening years proved to be years not merely of drift and 
indecision, but what is n1uch worse, years of disarray. The thrust that we 
had. given to the economy in . the mid~seventies had · generated its own 
momentum which continued to take the ~ountry forward for a while even . 
afterwards, until, fo_r want of direction and support, it began to slow down. 
Had the momentum been kept up in 1977 to 1979, the country would not 
have been in the state we found last year when the GNP fell by about 4.5 
per cent. 

Since several Hon. Members had spoken of the performance from 1977 
to 1979, it is worth our while to compare the results of the policies for three 
years-1974 to 1977-with the results of the policies of the Janata Govern-
ment and the Lok Dal Government in the succeeding three years. You have . 
probably heard the figures. But I give them again for the record. You 
wUl notice, where we needed increase, that is, in the actual growth of the 
GNP, it carne down from 4.1 per.cent to 3.3 per cent; the industrial growth 
rate ftom 6.7 in 1974-77 to 3.2 in 1977-80; growth rate of exports at current 
prices from 26. 8 to 7. 8 in 1977 -80. The growth rate of agricultural production 
came down from 1.7 in 1974-77 to 0.8 in 1977-80; and where we needed a 
decrease, for instance, in the growth in wholesale price index-counting 
1970-71 = 100 on a point to point basis-from 5.2 it rose to 8.8 in 1977-80. 
The growth in consumer price index-March to March basis-rose from 5 
per cent to .6.2 per cent. (See also Table on Page 156). 

The World Bank report was cited with great flourish in referring to the 
performance of the fiscal years 1976-79-a vain attempt to show how much 
was done by the Janata Government. This document was prepared by the 
World Bank staff and does not necessarily reflect the views of the Bank's 
Executive Directors. Perhaps, the Hon. Member was under the impression 
that the figures he read out referred only to the Janata Party and Lok Dal 
period. Actually, in World Bank parlance, this term 'fiscal period 1976-79' 
includes the period 1975-76, 1976-77 as also 1977-78 and 1978-79. 
In these 
four years the highest growth rate was in 1975-76, which was 9.6 per cent. 

,. ,.T·'.~ 

I have earlier mentioned whathappened in 1979-80 for the growth rate; i.e. 
it slumped by(-) 4.5 per cent. The same World Bank report states that 
the stabilization measures taken in 1975 brought the severe inflation of that 
period under control. We do not want, nor is there need, to quote from 
the World Bank reports or for that matter any other report prepared by a 
foreign agency, as our Socialis.t and Marxist members seem so keen to do. 
The facts of our achievements speak for themselves. 

What is the fact of the achievements of Janata Party and Lok Dal 
Governments? During those three years, the rate of growth works out to 
3.3 per cent which is less than the trend of growth rate of 3.5 per cent and 
lower than the average annual growth rate of 4.1 per cent during the three 
years preceding the Janata and the Lok Dal rule. Even the 3.3 per cent 
growth rate during 1977 to 1979 was made possible only by the long-tern1 
policies followed and the momentum created by my earlier Government, as 
[ stated at the beginning. 

Inflation, Sir, is the main subject of conversation everywhere. The 
current. Economi9 Survey giyes figures which show how we ha:ve brought 
down the inflation rate from last year. Obviously; we have not yet· been 
able completely to reverse the trend set by .the last few years. However; 
It was alleged by one Hon. 
the price situation has somewhat improved. 
Member that India's rate of inflation is the highest in the world. 
I do not 
know from what source the Hon. Member gets his information. According 
to the latest IMF International Financial Statistics, the increase in consumer 
price indices in India from December 1979 to September 1980 was 7.5 
per cent. 
I should like to give the House some comparative figures. They 
are: Korea 24.3 %, Mexico 22.5 %, Pakistan 14.2 %, U.K. 12.8 %, Philippines 
11.2 %, Indonesia 9.8 %, USA 9.5% and India, as I mentioned earlier, 7.5%. 
However, this is no satisfaction to us and even 
though it is extremely 
difficult to insulate our economy from international inflationary pressures, 
we are trying hard to keep prices from rising. But some items like oil, 
as everybody knows, are not in our control. On our return to Government, 
we gave priority to halt the drift iind to initiate new programmes to sustain 
economic development. 

The main thrust of Government policy is to increase production. 

In 
agriculture, we must expand irrigation, provide quality seeds and chemical 
inputs. and strengthen extension services. The following figures speak for 
themselves. Fertilizer consumption in 1979-80 was 5.2 million tonnes. 
Area under high-yielding varieties in 1979-80 was 35.2 million hectares and 
in 1980-81, 48 million hectares. 
Institutional credit for agriculture by 
co-operatives and banks has gone up from Rs 2,550 crore to Rs 2,990 
crore. 

Industrial performance in 1980-81 was much better than in 1979-80. 
We have taken steps to ensure better utilization of installed capacity, remove 

restraints on production, raise limits -on investments on small-scale units, 
ancillaries and tiny units. 

Performance within each sector of the infrastructure was closely 
monitored by the Special C9ord,nation Cell, problems were identified and 
better coordination affected, as a result of which the industrial growth rate 
improved from 1.4 per cent in 1979-80 to 4 per cent in 1980-81. Electricity 
generation (as the percentage over previous year) improved from 2.2 per 
cent to 6 per cent. Coal production improved from 106.9 million tonnes 
to 115 million tonnes, Cargo handling by major ports (from April to 
November) improved from 480 lakh tonnes to 510 lakh tonnes. 

I was told that for some unknown reasons the word 'export' was re-

garded almost as a bad word by the previous Governments. So, we bad 
to take major initiatives to rescue it from stagnation. 

The public distribution system has been strengthened. The offstake 
figures show that rice was 3.28 million tonnes in 1979-80 whereas in 1980-81 
it was 4.34 million tonnes. 
In wheat, in°provement has not been very much. 
But still it is an improvement from 5.14 million tonries to 5. 9 million tonnes. · 
During 1980-81, 40,000 fair price shops were opened mostly in rural areas. 
It was amusing to hear that credit was being taken by Opposition 
parties for securing higher sugarcane prices. Actually, this was made possible 
only by our implementation of rational sugar pricing and distribution policies. 
This policy brought the total sugar production up to what is the highest in 
the last five years, 29 lakh tonnes till February 7; 1981. Those who created 
the gigantic sugar muddle in 1979 can hardly take credit for this reversal of 
the trend. 

We prefer to help the kisan rather than enter into competition in shouting 
slogans of sympathy for him. When I said that 25 per cent of the Plan 
outlay would be set apart for farmer&, I meant it. The level of investment 
for agriculture, ru1al development, irrigation and Special Area Development, 
which benefits rural areas, is indeed of that order. 

The other repet_ifive theme of a particular party is that of the import 
of foodgrains to build buffer stocks during 1974-77. 
I dealt with this 
comprehensively in my reply to the President's Address last year when I 
pointed out that the buffer stocks could not have been built but for the higher 
procurement of foodgrains by our Government. Please remember that 
it was our Government which was responsible for the policy of buffer stock-
ing as an important factor of managing inflation and an instrument to provide 
essential commodities at reasonable rates to weaker sections of the society. 
It is wholly wrong 
to accuse u~ of slowing down procurement. We are following this up. 
Already the procurement of rice in kharif 1980-81 has exceeded 4.7 million 
tonnes, as against 3.6 million tonnes in the whole kharif year of 1979-80. 
But West Bengal, which has had a very good harvest, I hear, has procured 
very much less than it can and should do. 

For our part we intend to continue these policies. 

DEMOCRACY AND .NATIONAL STRENGTH 

We all know what sort of interest that Government had taken in science 

and technology, and the consequent frustration of our scientists and tech-
nologists. Were not the achievements of our science denigrated in public, 
especially, in so far as our peaceful nuclear experiment was concerned? 
I am not blaming either the then Government or olir scientists, but it was 
an odd coincidence that even the Bhaskara (Satellite) they sent up into space 
refused to send back information. It i~ a dark chapter in the history of our 
science and technology. 
I assure the House that we have the greatest 
commitment to science and technology and that our outlays on Plan and 
non-Plan expenditure will be significant as well as result-oriented. We shall 
continue to give all support to our brilliant scientists and technologists. 

The law and order situation is one which worries all, and I share that 
anxiety. But one must see the problem in perspective. During. th1: last 
years of my previous regime, agitations were deliberately fostered, giving rise 
to a climate of violence. The clements responsible for this were permitted 
to operate unchecked and thereby gained respectability. Later, during the 
· Janata Party-. Lok Dal interregnum, caste and communal considerations 
. came to the fore. The outcome is there for all to see-. · disregard for .autho-
rity, demoralisation of. law enforcement . agencies; politicisation of 
government apparatus and heightened communal and caste tensions. · 

Now, while the Central and State Governments are taking measures to 
curb lawlessness, some parties have taken it upon themselves to encourage; if 
not foment, a variety of fresh agitations without the slightest regard for the 
damage caused to national life and national economy. 

Each individual's or group's welfare depends on the total picture and 
the overall progress. And progress depends on the produce from our fields 
and factories. Progress depends on the functioning, quality and output of 
our schools, colleges, universities and other public and technological 
establishments. 

Should any ofus say or do anything to clog these wheels of progress and 
gr<:>.wth? · I leave it to each one of you here in this House, and to tb.e 
nation, to judge whether there are elements and parties in our country who 
have incited and are inciting various sections. They have double talk of 
higher price to farmers and lower price to consumers. · Price rise and anti• 
pdce rise about the same com.n.1odity! The attempt is to hamper production 
by getting workers to stop or slow down work, by trying to paralyse the 
distribution system; to create tension and a fear psychosis. Whatever the 
legitimacy or otherwise of various demands, is it in the national interest to 
give slogans like RASTA RoKo or RAIL RoKo? 

An Hon. Member complained of my not visiting all the places where 
disturbances occur. . In this, I cannot totally ignore the advice of the local 
administration. Some situations, especially communal ones, become very 
tense and it is considered advisable to go there only when there is relative 
calm. At other times, going helps to restore confidence. On occasions one 

has noticed that frequent visits rekindle .. sorrowful memories and keep 
emotions on the boil, thereby delaying normalcy. 
. The agitation in Assam has been going on for a long time. The 
Government has adopted a most patient. and constructive attitude. It is 
indeed a pity that this has not evoked adequate response from the leaders of 
the agitation. Now, a new element has been introduced-terrorism, · the 
throwing of bombs. Such a development cannot be countenanced by any 
Government. 

We have had prolonged consultations with the leaders of political parties 
on this issue. It is unfortunate that a political party, which claims to be a 
national one, has now chosen to come out in favour of an agitation which 
has caused untold hardship to the people of Assam and the North-East, 
and considerable damage to the national economy. Amongst those most 
I am not talking about English, 
upset are the plains and hill tribal people. 
I am talking about the higher 
I am not talking about primary education. 
institutes of science. 
1 think, yesterday, it was said that various universities. · have been 
interfered with; actually six out ofs6ven. · Arid so fat as I know, the seventh 
university· is Visva Bharati which is a Central University .. So, they cannot 
interfere with it .... If it is not true, if they have not interfered, I wili accept 
it. This is the information we have from the local people, the people 
concerned with these bodies. 

Similarly, I have had delegations from the Ramakrishana Mission 
complaining of taking over their polytechnics and schools. We know that 
fine 
this institution enjoys worldwide renown for 
educational, medical and relief work... It is a confirmed information. But 
if it is not, as L have already said, I am prepared ·to look into it. 

its dedicated and 

Now, I come to foreign policy. 

It seems to me that there are a few Hon. 
Members who live in an imaginary world of their own. One spoke of the 
normalization of relations with our neighbours during the Janata Party 
It was my "Government 
regime. History cannot be so easily distorted. 
which took the first step for normalization with Pakistan and the last major 
initiative in this direction was the Simla Agreement. Willingly giving up 
our river waters to the extent of damaging the Calcutta port cannot be called 
normalization. Good neighbourly relations can exist and grow only on the 
basis of reciprocity and mutual benefit. To this path we shall steadfastly 
adhere. We are as anxious as anybody. 
In fact, we think, it is essential 
to have good relations with all our neighbours and we are doing everything 
possible to have them. Another Hon. Member spoke of lack of moral 
character. Strange words indeed from that party! Events have demons-
trated the rightness of our principled stand on various issues. 

The recent Non-aligned Conference has highlighted our balanced, 
constructive and active approach. The H~n. Member, Shri Vajpayee's later 
statements to. the Press revealed unsuspected depths of humour, perhaps 

unconsciously. How · else can we explain his approbation of India's role 
at the Havana Summit? Through the Janata Party-Lok Dal interregnum, 
the question among the Non-aligned was : "India, where are you?" 
In that 
period, various factors, including international factors, led to the weakening 
of the Non-aligned Movement, and when I met world leaders in Salisbury 
and Belgrade, they wondered if the movement could survive or it would 
break up. 

Thus, the Conference of Foreign Ministers of Non-aligned countries was 
held at a time when perils .abounded to world understanding and especially 
to non-aligned unity. There were propagandistic statements and homilies, 
and many did 
their best to sow sm picion among us. But everyone 
recognizes that, in Delhi, we were able to avert the danger of division and, to 
that extent, increase our capacity to work for the lessening of international 
I must compliment our Foreign Minister and his team of officials 
tensions. 
for their patient, unruffled and untiring work to iron out points of differeuces · 
and to persuade the antagonists to come closer. We now have a constructive 
initiative on the Iran-Iraq question. Regarding Afghanistan, leaders fron1 
· all parts oftlie world, who met me, have commended as practical the Iridian 
· stand which seeks to help create an atmosphere for a.n early political sohition .. 
Much is made of the fact that our Draft did riot refer to one or two 
it is . clear that this was not a national draft, nor an 
points. Now, 
It was a 
elucidation of the Indian point of view, but a consensus paper. 
compilation of various ideas aimed at a common approach which became an 
excellent starting point and achieved maximum agreement. 

As I said earlier, this does not mean that we have, at any time, changed 
our views or that they were not clearly made known to all. News from 
different quarters of international community inform us of a generally 
favourable reaction to the Conference. Here, in this House, the fact that we 
are criticised by opposing sections speaks volumes for our non-aligned stand. 
Anyhow, I do not expect impartial judgment from those who have made it 
their policy to attack me whatever I do or say. 

Our farmers are true patriots. They suffer and serve, sweating in their 
their sons who labour in 
fields, or protecting our borders, or through 
factories. Their spirit of service and sacrifice has kept this nation going. 
Our farmers' rally was indeed an impressive and inspiring event. It gave our 
farmers from all parts of the country, even from the remotest areas in the 
North and North-East, an opportunity to come together and demonstrate 
Indian unity in spite of great distances and diversities. 
It gave them the 
feeling of participation in the larger national effort. Observers were 
especially impressed by the exemplary behaviour and discipline of such 
massive numbers, unprecedented at any time anywhere in the world. This 
should be a source of pride to all Indians. 

Our working classes have always shown a high sense of patriotism more 
so during difficult timesan"d I do sincerely hope that they will act with patience 

SELEC!BD SPEECHES AND .WRIT~NGS OF INDIRA GANDHI 

and restraint and do nothing to hamper prodµction in factories or work in 
offices. Within the means available, the Government have been always 
anxious to do justice to all sections of people, and shall continue to d9 so. 
But we cannot ignore the poorest amongst the poor who call for immediate 
attention. The better oft' people cannot be secure unless the weaker sections 
are made stronger. There is not, or rather should not be, rivalry between any 
sections. 

My speech would be incomplete without a word of appreciation of our 
Armed Forces. The entire country admires the manner in which they 
serve and sacrifice for our security, and, in times of peace bring relief to 
victims of calamities. We remember also our ex-servicemen. 

I have no quarrel with the Opposition; 

As I have said earlier, it is not my desire to score debating points or to 
continue an endless discussion on the past. Today's world moves much too 
faf;t to allow us that luxury. 
wish them well. They have somehow to criticise the Government whiqh 
we do not mind. 
. Sometimes the c.riticism is theatrical and sometimes tends 
to gimmickry~. Perhaps they think that this will help them. They are the 
. best judges o.f what tliey shouid do. 
I am more concerned with what we and . 
our party do and we shall not allow any one to divert our . attention from . 
basic problems. 

I have repeatedly appealed for and offered co-operation. 

I am sorry 
to &ay that the response has been greater confrontation. Opposition parties 
have trod the path of confrontation aUthese years. Can we not give a trial 
to co-operation and discuss matters with cordiality? 
I d.oubt if anyone 
disputes the view that the situation, in various ways, in and around our 
country is serious. The future is upon us. All countries are faced with 
hard decisions. We have no soft options. This demands a concerted and 
stupendous endeavour which can only be aclueved by constructive 
co-operation from Hon'ble Members, from political parties, from farmers 
and workers, from professionals and intellectuals, from women and from 
youth, in fact, from all our people·. 
If we can consider ;our problems in that 
larger context-in the context of the nation1s problems and difficulties and 
international situation-· Sir, I have no doubt 
this country has the 
strength to overcome these obstacles and to march forw~rd towards socialism, 
towards better life for our people in solving many problems. This 
co-operation I seek from the Hon. Members of all sides of the House. I 
commend the Motion of Thanks to the President's Address to the House. 

that 

Corruption and Vigilance 
Two OF THE most urgent problems, which confronted us ori resuming 
office 15 months ago, were restoration of law and order and re-establishment 
In both these 
of public confidence in the Government's capacity to govern. 
respects 
the 
deplorable state the country was in at the end of 1979. However, several 
incidents involving policemen have unfortunately come in the way of their 
commanding the fullest public trust and support. This should be a challenge 
to senior police officers as well as to the elected representatives of the 
people. 

there· has been considerable 

improvement compared 

to 

Senior officers mur,t go all out to regain the people's trust and also to . 

look into the genuine hardships of their own junior colleagues. . In this 

· · task, they will have the Government's fullestsupport. 
. The people rightly expect the administration to be efficient; prompt and . 
In i:µy address to other conferences of police officials held over the 
· honest. 
last year, I have spoken about efficiency in handling law and order situations 
and in helping the Government in dealing with social tensions. Today's 
conference is in a way complementary to the earlier deliberations, concerned 
as it is with eliminating corruption in public services and public life. 

Inflation . is statistically provable, corruption 

If there is unanimity about anything, it is· in regard to inflation and 
corruption. Both are increasing and both are ·eating into the vitals of our 
its 
society. 
pervasiveness is felt. Fortunately, there are still a large number of persons 
who are untainted by it and, to use a traditional Indian expressio~, it is 
because of their goodness that the rains occur in time and the crops;grow. 
But there is no doubt that at various levels, not only of the bureaucracy 
and of political life, but also in trade •and commerce, corruption is a major 
concern. 

is not-but 

It is sometimes said that corruption is due to poverty and gross disparities. 
This would imply that the rich and advanced countries are free of it, which 
It is also an uncalled for slur on the poor, for the 
is very far from the truth. 
poor of India are among the most upright persons anywhere. They are the 
victims of corruption and exploitation, not the cause of it. Corruption is 
noticed and commented upon in our country because it occurs where the 
administration comes into touch with the people at large. It arises when · 
individuals want to follow consumption patterns beyond their incomes. 
The constant emphasis of the media on material goods, the visions of the 

Inaugural speech at the· Ninth Joint Conference of Officers of the Central Bureau of 
Investigation (CBI) and the State anti-corruption agencies, New Delhi, March 23, 1981 

comforts enjoyed in advanced societies, proliferation of regulations, 
the 
pressure of inflation, the breakdown of religious and ethical constraints, a 
general 
increase in 
corruption. 

in permissiveness-all 

rise 

these contribute to 

It is obvious that unless we check this disease, the health of the country 
will be in peril. The fear of exposure is said to be a great deterrent. To a 
large extent this is true. But the manner in which journals, which are not 
too responsible, have flung mud at persons of integrity, has added to 
demoralisation. When nobody and nothing is sacred, from where will 
people draw their sustenance? 

The police force is our major instrument of dealing with corruption. . The 
aberrations of individuals in the force have brought the entire service into 
disrepute. But the wilful use of the CBI and other agencies, in the recent 
past, in aid of political vendettas and their inability to prove much 
publicised cases, also added to the devaluation of the force. The process of 
restoring these. agencies to a position of effectivern;ss is now in hand. 

It is good that the CBI an<! State anti-corruption agencies are meeting 
here to discuss common· probiems and ways.to improve investigation and 
prosecution of offences involving corruption. There has to be a continuous 
process of improvement in insights and skills for yet another reason. With 
technological and economic advancement, crime also is becoming more and 
more complex and sophisticated. This is particularly true of economic 
offences. Detention must be equally, if not more, sophisticated. 

Vigilance has an important role 

in deterring corruption. Several 
committees have laid stress on the need for a constant review of procedures, 
rules and regulations to prevent misuse of public money. Primarily, it is 
the responsibility of the head of the Ministry or Department to maintain 
the integrity of administration within his jurisdiction. The role of the CBI . 
It has certain specialised skil! in the matter of 
is only supplementary. 
investigation of complicated cases and cases which are to be placed before 
the courts of law. Barring those cases where such expertise is needed, other 
departmental misconducts should be looked into by the Departments them-
selves. 

Heads of Ministries and Departments must energise their vigilance 
departments. 
Inspection seems to have virtually disappeared. There 
should be more intensive monitoring of delays in the disposal of files, random 
checking of decisions taken at various levels, and prompt communication 
to the parties involved. Service rules contain all the necessary guidelines. 
But they are not properly enforced. Protection to honest officials and 
punishment to guilty ones can be ensured only if there is a social conscience 
and a sense of fair play and impartiality. 

Vigilance cases should be promptly dispo5ed of. 

I have heard of 
proceedings dragging on for years, but it was shocking to know about the 
case just mentioned which went on for as much as-or is still probably on-

for 20 years. . My own suggestion is that no vigilance case should be allowed 
to linger beyond one year . 

. Sometimes, the vigilance mechanism is used to settle personal and intra-

office scores. The names of officials .not directly involved are dragged in 
and they are pursued even after they have been superannuated. 
is 
essential that vigilance mechanism is not thus misused and its reputation 
compromised. There must be some sense of proportion. We have 
exempted a large segment of the population from Income Tax so that the 
tax machinery can now concentrate on the bigger people. 

It 

The CBI has been through agonising times; for, the last few years have 
been a period of political strain and uncertainty. The very existence of our 
democratic system was threatened by forces of disruption and instability. 
This was bound to affect the working of the anti-corruption agencies also. 
Organizations like the CBI, wielding vast powers over the liberty and reputa-
tion .of our public servants and public men, must function not only efficiently 
but should also be.demonstrably free from any extraneous influence and 
considerations. · There is a feeling amongst the peopl~that persons known 
to be corrupt escape the .clutches of law because of their position and 
influence, while small fry are caught in the net. Such an impression is 
detrimental to the credibility of government as a whole. 

·1 should also like to say a few words about the methods of investigation 
and the general approach to the problem of detecting and dealing with cases 
of corruption against public. servants and persons in public life. While 
bringing the guilty to book, it should be ensured that the innocent do not 
suffer. 
Investigations, interrogations, searches and arrests should not 
humiliate the people involved. The mere fact of a CBI investigation against 
a public servant already lowers his reputation in the eyes of the public and 
members of his own family. Therefor.e, anti-corruption agencies must be 
circumspect in dealing with complaints.: The personal experience of a large 
number of people in the last few years has brought to light some points 
which I snould like to place before you and which clearly point to the need 
for improvement in investigation. 

Raids should cause the least harassment to the families of the persons 
involved. We found that the raids were conducted in a very rude manner. 
Women were, practically, bodily made to get up from bed, and children not 
allowed to leave the house to go to the schools while the raids were being 
conducted. Relatives or friends who dropped in by chance were not 
allowed to leave. The use of telephone facilities was absolutely denied. 
One person was telling me that although he alone was the person against 
whom the complaints were made, twenty-two members of his family were 
harassed in every possible way including looking into their accounts, their 
houses and their friends and others. While evaluating expenditure, eatables 
such as bread, eggs, vegetables which were in the refrigerator were counted 
and valued and given exorbitant prices which were not prevailing at that 

time in the bazaar, to say nothing of more solid items such as dais (pulses), 
atta (flour), etc. 

To check cross entries, relatives were mercilessly harassed. Enquiries 
were made even from the barbers, vegetable shops and dhobis (washermen) 
about the expenditure. Naturally, this brings disrepute in the neighbour-
hood to the persons· concerned. 

The CBI officer, who conducts the enquiry today is also responsible for 
conducting the case in the court. So, for him it becomes a prestige issue. 
feel that the officer who conducts the enquiries should not be deputed to 
pursue the case in the court. 

Trials in courts are so protracted that delay seems to have become the 
rule rather than the exception in the administration of justice. Here too, the 
stronger elements are able to engage more resourceful lawyers and adopt 
· delaying tactics. The right of legal redress implies the right to be cleared or 
convicted as early as possible. 
It is t~ue that investigating and prosecuting 
agencies have no control over· the courts. But I feel that if. you do your 
professional home work better, the hardships will · be mitigated to a 
considerable extent. 

I would like to draw your attention, specially to a type of crime which 
may have been there before but to which greater attention is paid, and, 
certainly it involves greater heart-break and sorrow. And these are crimes 
against women. Hardly a day passes when some instance of either a dowry 
murder or a suspected dowry ·murder or abduction is not brought to my 
notice. And the usual complaint is that they have been to all concerned in 
their respective States and, when they feel that the police are not acting, at 
that stage only they have to come to the Prime Minister. I think that very 
special attention has to be gfyen to thi!> question. 

There is widespread belief that the efficiency of the various police services 
, will increase if there are more gadgets. This is correct only to a certain 
extent. Because, in spite of all the latest equipment and a much larger force, 
in the affluent countries there is a sharp increase in crime and growing 
police ineffectiveness. · In fact, more so than in our own country. 

Just about a month ago, I was interviewed by a reporter of a well-known 
journal from America and one of the questions he asked was : "Do you think 
that Delhi is going to become as bad as New York so far as crime and 
violence are concerned?" And I could only answer : "I hope not". 

We have planned our development with a view to raising the standard 
of living of our teeming millions. Hence, our economic development is 
inspired by social justice. We have been earmarking thousands of crores of 
rupees towards this goal. 
It is all the more essential that our achievements 
do not suffer because of mismanagement or neglect. Every· rupee 
earmarked for this purpose must reach those for whom it is meant. 

-.·.r;,·· 

.Our .country is passing through difficult days. I have always admired the 
remarkable ability of our ordinary people to overcome these crises and to 
emerge . successful. 

While· I am sure that we shall be able to overcome the present internal 
and external challenges, no one can deny that this calls for a great deal of 
discipline and efficiency in administration.· If India is to progress and be 
strong enough to face her external threats and solve her internal problems, 
the containment of corruption is a basic need. Otherwise, the fabric of our 
country is likely to be damaged. 

I inaugurate this conference and I wish it success. 

Call for Unity, Discipline and Hard Work 

TonAY AGAIN IS the birthday of Free India. 
I greet you all. We come 
· here every year to unfurl the flag. This is no mere ritual or custom; it is a 
duty. 

This is the day when we recall those years when people of all religions, 
all castes, all h1nguages, all States, rich and poor, women and men, old and 
young, were all one and united. What was our slogan? 'We may lose our head 
but India must become free'. To achieve this goal we did not care for the 
insults and humiliations inflicted on us, and, put into our freedom struggle 
all our physi~al, mater!al and moral resources. Many families were ruined, 
many lakhs ef people sacrificed their lives and many jails were filled. 
In 
this Red Fort itself, there were prisoners who had passed through the jaws 
of death. There is no village in India which does not nave its own saga of 
courage and bravery of its people. Today, we remember all that and pay our 
homage to those freedom fighters· whether they were in our peaceful and 
non-violent movement or whether they followed other paths. Today we 
have to tell these old accounts of freedom struggle specially to our younger 
generation, because it is from that seed that the New India is sprouting. 
The plant is still frail, we have to nurse it with our sweat and hard labour, 
and with all the care make it grow just as we plant trees to make India green. 
I had spoken from this place a year ago. During this year, like in other 
years, you have faced many difficulties. Your problems are known to me 
and I view them not only as a Prime Minister but also as a woman and a 

Free rendering of the Independence Day speech delivered in Hindi from the Red Fort, 
Delhi, August 15, 1981 

moiher. But, if there were problems and difficulties-and they exist today 
also-there were successes and achievements too. APPLE, which was 
inaugurated yesterday, is one such achievement. For the first time, through 
this satellite APPLE, not only those who are present here but lakhs of others 
in different parts of the country are able to listen and watch today's function 
and thus participate in it. This is not a small achievement for a nation 
which only a few years back was enmeshed in the mire of colonialism. 

You may ask that ifwe can perform such big tasks for whic.h we are all 
proud and happy and congratulate our scientists and engineers, why is it 
that we do not accomplish other lesser jobs? Why cannot we control prices? 
This is a moot question. The prices are still high and I know the difficulties 
you face, specially my sisters who have to run the homes. 
I would, however, 
like to tell you that though prices have not come down, the rate of increase 
in prices has certainly been controlled to some extent and the situation is 
improving gradually. There are many reasons for the rise in prices. One 
is less production and we are engaged in increasing it.. But another reason 
is-. we have some selfish people in om; country, as elsewhere also, who try to 
take advantage out of such problems. 
In trying to satisfy their self-interest, .· 
they forget the overall interest of the country. Even 
today, hoarding, 
blackmarketing and profiteering are going on, because those who indulge in 
these anti-social activities had received encouragement a few years back and 
have still not come into our net. Although in some areas there has been 
some impact of the action taken by us, it is still not as much as it should have 
been. People demand from us as to why we do not take stern measures. 
But, if we try to take even slight stiff steps, so many obstacles come in the 
way. Some steps have been taken and these have had some effect; more 
such measures will certainly be taken against the anti-social elen1ents. 

Some shortages occurred because of the nature and the weather and 
- sometimes even because of our mistakes. However, we are making an all 
out effort to increase production. 
In fact, agricultural production has gone 
up. As you all know, agricultural production this year has been exceedingly 
good. You may ask: If wheat production has gone up, why are we import-
ing wheat? This is because here, in the country, an effort is being made by 
some people to purchase. and hoard it with a view to raising the prices later. 
This may cause suffering to many people, especially the poorest or those 
who live in remote areas. This is why, even though we did not need it 
immediately, we made the purchase as wheat was available easily and at low 
prices abroad. As one should be prepared all the time to face problems, we 
took this step so that we may protect our people from difficulties. 

There bas been increase in industrial production also. Our emphasis 
has been to· improve the infrastructure on which depends all production, 
progress and development, whether of the farmers or of the factories. There 
has thus been growth in energy; coal and rail transport system though we 
have not been able to accomplish all that is needed. 

· · In these years, there has been considerable improvement in social services 
like health; education and others. Even then it is not enough and we cannot 
reach them to the people. Why? Because, while these services increase, our 
population increases aJa still faster rate. So, whatever may be the number 
of new schools; colleges and universities, and, howsoever 111any new hospitals 
and dispensaries are opened, the number of people who need them is always 
more.· 

·· Whether it is a question of inflation or population or any other question, 
the job cannot be completed unless there is fullest co-operation from all of 
you. The Government has heavy responsibility which, through your vote, 
you Ii.ave entrusted it with; but in a democracy the ordinary citizen also has 

an equal. amount of duties. The atmosphere geb vitiated if people are 

spendthrift arid keep on buying things whatever may be the price and whether 
they need a thing or not. 
I would even say that in these difficult times 
anyone who acts against the interest of the society acts against the nation. 
How to check these elements? Laws and rules are made but they. cannot 
always be fully implemented because it is not fo1: the government alone to 
implement them. At different levels, :triany people contribute to complete 
this work and the slightest lapse anywhere can dislocate the entire 
programme and the policy. We want your co-operation in this also. 
do not mean. in the least that you take law in your hands. I want to say that 
you should create such an atmosphere in the society that people who want 
to do wrong things are not able to prosper and are identified and made to 
feel ashamed before others. 
If you create such an atmosphere, you will see 
how quickly the situation can be reformed. 

Whatever we do now, like th.is purchase of wheat from abroad, s0111e 
people raise their voices against it. Who are behind them? Voices are 
raised by people because they are provoked to do so by others. What 
are the forces .beltlnd them? It is th.ese forces that want that the prices of 
foodgrairis should go up in.the market, not that the farmers should get a 
higher . price .. 

There are many such things which either get stuck in the courts or some 
other obsfacfes come in the way, because of which they remain ui:lresolv'"d 
and get delayed. We have to create a new atmosphere in our society so that 
everybody may under:stand his duties. 
Like the freedom fighters I just 
mentioned, all ofyou have also to act as soldiers to safeguard the freedom. 
You have to involve yourself in this task with the saine spirit of sacrifice 
and service. This is not someone else's work, not of any Government or 
of any political party only. This is the work of the country, of the common 
citizen of India, of the poor; of the backward, of the middle class, in fact, 
of all the people.. In· the conditions of today some people may earn profits, 
but if the country does not become strong, they will not benefit from 
profits for long; they will not be able to remain happy for long. We have 
to keep all these 1natters ,in view. 

In today's world, not only in our country but in other countries also, 
wherever I have gone or where others have gone and have described the 
situation, we find there is violence, crime and lawlessness everywhere. We 
are not concerned 'with what happens in other countries, although it does 
influence the situation here. We have to see that we bring about 
improvement in our own attitudes. We should spread our own humanism 
the society, which is the 
and bring back again basic moral values 
foundation of all religions, from which not only we, in India, but I think, the 
entire humanity has departed to take a wrong road. With all this wisdom, 
knowledge and capability, instead of using it for good causes, how is this 
power being used? We see that big powers are using their resources not in 
development work, not in helping the poor, but in increasing their armaments 
-. bigger and bigger and more sophisticated ones. What 
for? For 
the annihilation of people, or, destruction of houses, farms and fields or 
nations. This is being done knowingly by the human race. 
Is it the path 
India should follow? · Time has come when every Indian must consider this 
. matter in depth and understand his responsibiiity. 

in 

Before we tell others anything, we have to set things right in .our own 
In this country where peace used to prevail, where people always 

home. 
lived together amicably-though sometimes small quarrels take place-
why do disturbances take place on petty matters, sometimes in the name of 
languages? These are the things which come in the way of our progress 
If fhere is 
and development. We have to remove these from our path. 
any cause behind it we have to find it and root it out. We have to create 
an atmosphere in which no impediment comes in the way of our development 
and progress. This is the message of our Independence Day, this. year and 
every year. 

We have reached one stage in our progress, but the journey is still very 
long. Stockpile of armaments is increasing all around us; posing increasing 
danger not only to India but to the entire region and, I think, to the whole 
world. When there is danger, everybody suffers but burden falls more on 
those who are poor and have shortage of resources, commodities, money 
or the like. Therefore, while others have to be vigilant anyway, we Indians 
have to be more vigilant and alert. · 

We have to give a new direction to our society. We have to learn many 
things from our history and heritage. If there are superstitions or other 
evils, we should not have the least hesitation to remove them. We have to 
develop our own strength. Everyone has his share of .. problems and 
difficulties, individuals as well as countries. You all know what I have 
suffered as a mother, but, for me much bigger is my duty towards you who 
are like my children. And, that is why these things can hold back neither 
me nor you. Time waits for none. Our children are growing. whether you 
help them or not. Their's and other people's demands are increasing, and 

rightly so, because if some people are getting things, why not the others-
the poor and the backward. 

At this time, all of us must develop the feelings of unity and strength. 
We have always strived for friendship with our neighbouring countries and 
others. But, when they spurned and attacked us, we did face the aggression 
with courage. And, I congratulate and express gratefulness again on your 
behalf to our jawans and officers of the Defence. Forces for the way in which 
they kept our borders secure, and; I know they will continue to do so. But 
our effort is that there should be no war; there should be friendship 
with our neighbours and with far-off countries. Nobody need consider 
it as our weakness. 
It is not because of any weakness; we do it for 
the sake of our ideals. 
It is our effort that those ideals should guide our 
country. 

It is our policy that all regions of the country should progress and 
develop-including the hill regions, the desert areas and the people living 
in the · forests. 
In the Five Year Plan, there are schemes for. everyone-
farmers, workers, students, harijans; adivasis, poor people and those belong-
ing to middle class. · Millions of new opportunities for employment will 
open up for people and I have confidence that our youth will take full 
advantage of them. They will also, I am sure, find new avenues for self-
employment. 
It has been our constant effort to push forward schemes that 
are beneficial to the farmers and the workers. 

There was some misunderstanding because recently an Ordinance was 
issued which prevents strikes in essential public services. 
I want to assure 
the workers that this Ordinance is not against them. It has never been our 
intention and we will never do anything to suppress them or create difficultie~ 
for the1n in any way. But it is necessary that the public services are kept 
going, not because that these are governmental programmes, but because it 
is in the interest of the good of the couutry. These things are required by 
the com1non man, and are needed for the strength and security of the_ nation .. 
Workers have always discharged their responsibilities and I have confidence 
that they and our farmers, our intellectuals and other sections will continue 
to discharge their responsibilities. 

Today is a special day, being Raksha-Bandhan. Thi:, is not a religious 
festival. Tt is a social festival for cordiality and for friendship. This is the 
day when people extend their hands of friendship. What for? For 
protecting each other. On this day we seek the co-operation of all countries 
in maintaining peace and in protecting the humanity. To our own 
countrymen, we say that they should celebrate this day not only in the 
mao.ner of brother-sister relationship but see how they can protect Mother 
India, how the unity in the country could be further strengthened and how 
· each individual can be a protector of the nation. 

Earlier, I had told you about a slogan. Now I want to say that the flag 
under which we are standing is not just a piece of cloth. This is a symbol 

of the sacrifices made in our struggle for freedom, later, of the sacrifices 
by our brave soldiers on our borders in various wars, and now of 
those who with their hard labour are engaged in the struggle for India's 
pro'gress, arid also of our promising youth. Our flag and our National 
Antneni are no ordinary things. They unite the country and bind it 
together. · That is why I want to say that 'the glory of the flag must be 
protected even at the cost of life'. 

University Courses in Non-Violence and Peace 

QUESTION : . In view of the fact that in all parts of the world there is a~ 
alarming growth of hatred in thought and violence in action, also a kind of 
reckless recourse to agitational approach, do you think the time has come 
for our acade1nies in India to include courses on Peace Studies as a subject 
per se in their respective curricular? 

PRIME MINISTllR : The conquest of violence is civilization's central problem. 
But the vast stockpiles of armaments; their increasing deadliness and the 
rationalisation of their use in the nam~ of a nation or a political concept 
make us wonder whether the brute in nian has been transformed. Peace 
Studies in universities are welcome, even iftheir reach is limited. ·· One of 
the objectives of education at all stages should be the sublimation of the 
in.sfinct. of aggression. 

QUESTION :. What are the reasons or circumstances that have aggravated 
these tendencies, specially during the last two decades, not only in I11clia 
but globall:y? 

PRIME M1NISTER ·: It is difficult to say. The fact that in affluent. &ocieties. 
there is even Il1ore brutality disproves one fallacy that poverty breeds violence. 
So-called primitive societies are among the gentlest. What we hail as pro-
gress ·. has _increased competitiveness and dissatisfaction. The media, 
espectally television, have also played a part in making violence popular 
and even a,cceptable .. One of the disservices of modern psychology i.s the 
notion that once a thing is explained, it is excused. 

Replies to questions by Dr Anima Bose, August 26, 1981 · 

QUEsnoN : Voluntary organizations have, in the past,· supplemented the 
efforts of the government towards constructive work, such as village uplift, 
women's welfare, service for the socially and. economically . backward. 
Would you say that voluntary agencies have an important role to play 
today as support groups, strengthening the work for non-violence arid peace 
whether being done in academies or being pron1oted by the country's 
government? As the elected leader of the people, what kind of 
the said 
contribution do you envisage 
agencies?· 

in this specific· area fro1n 

PRIME MINISTER : Official welfare agencies and, to a greater extent, voluntary 
social work organizations can redress the genuine grievances of individuals 
and groups. Wherever they are active, there is less social tension; 
It would 
be good for one or two universities to take up curricular and supporting work 
on an experimental basis to find out whether it makes any difference to the 
turbulence and threats to peace in their own communities of teachers, students 
and workers. 

QUESTION : ·Gandhiji show.ed his great confidence in you when he asked you 
to work in the terror-stricken areas of Delhi in the aftermath of Independence 
saying, "I trust you to see this work through", (Article: My Reminiscences of 
Bapu, 1957 included inJndia, Indira Gandhi, p. 23-24, Rupa & Co., 1975). 
That Gaudhiji appreciated your contribution in the.restoration of peace is 
evident by what he said before he insisted that you leave for Lucknow for 
rest, "Now I know your education and your years abroad have not been 
wasted", (Ibid, p. 24). Have you received help and co-operation in yoµr 
attempt~ to restore peace· and harmony in India. for which occasions have 
arisen ceaselessly since you became the Prime Minister of India in 1966? 
Ifnot, what steps can be taken to make this happen especially · among the 
youthin the academies? 

PRIME MINISTER : Whatever I haye been able to do has been because of the 
co-operation of our people. 
In alleviating sµflering during. droughts and 
floods or in dealing with the influx of refugees Jrom Bangladesh in 1971, 
our official and non-official agencies worked together admirably, Of course, 
communal and caste riotsoccur occasionally, but, by and large, the commu-
nities ljve at peace with one another. During troubled times, we find that 
while many lose their poise or get into pank, others do act with fortitud~-
even heroism-and help to restore normalcy. The danger is from parties 
apd organizations which unashamedly preach communal hatred, depicting 
whole groups of people as inferior, untrustworthy and anti national. We 
also have political elements who preach and practise violence on ideological 
grounds. · Nowadays every government has also to deal with individuals 

and groups who utilise sophisticated technology for criminal purposes, for 
example terrorist gangs and big-time gangsters. Everywhere in the world, 
government's work has become much more complex. 

Facing the Future with Confidence 
IT ~s RATHER difficult to kpow how to reply to this debate. Nothing new 
has been said. Most issues have been raised earlier. Towards the end of 
It can be 
the debate, the question concerning Shri Antulay was raised. 
called the Antulay debate and not a 'no confidence' debate. Hon. Members 
of the Opposition were trying to find new reasons to clothe the same old 
I am not a lawyer but I have had occasion to .. read something 
arguments. 
about the law. . The last years compelled me to do so! I noticed that he, 
. who was defending a case that had no defen<.;e, was the loudest in his · 
arguments: This is what we have found here. 

I am not going into the question of corruption. Those, who were on 
the Treasury Benches in the years just before, are hardly the people to throw 
It is their good fortune that we did not want to be vindictive. \Ve 
stones. 
do not want to labour these issues. There is hardly a person against whom 
his own colleagues have not brought forward serious and cogent allegations. 
There are hardly a few whose reputations were not the subject of talk-not 
only in India but in far corners of the world. Now to pretend to be clothed 
in innocence neither rings true nor is it even funny. 

Motions of "no confidence" are brought to discuss serious questions. 
What were the issues raised here? Have they not been discussed in the last 
few days, not just in passing but for hours and hours and hours? Did the 
Essential Services Maintenance Bill not go on into the early hours of the next 
day? You, Sir, yourself corrected Shri Stephen informing you that the debate 
lasted for 22 hours. Was that an issue to bring up in a "no confidence" 
motion almost immediately afterwards? It is the same with other questions. 
Take the Antulay issue. Has it not been discussed day after day ever since 
it came up? 

Unemployment has been mentioned. Perhaps an Hon. Member 
did speak of unemployment saying that I had not solved unemployment! 
With great respect, may I ask if he can tell me who has solved the unemploy-
ment probl.em and in which country, except those which are grossly under-
populated and have to import labour? If we had a population of only six 
million or so, we would certainly not have unemployinent. But who is not 

Speech during debate on a 'no confidence' motion, Lok Sabha, September 17, 1981 

aware of our population problem? As my friend Mohsina Kidwai pointed 
ciut, when we were trying to convince people of the importance of the 
the 
population problem and promoting family planning programmes, 
Opposition went all out to jettison the project. 

There are parties who have made it their main strategy to spread false-

hood. What falsehood was not spread a bout the family planning programme! 
How many people did they unearth who were forcibly sterilized? How 
many of them had to be helped? They had said when their Government 
came to power that they would give Rs 5,000 or Rs 10,000. How many 
people were given that money? How many people came forward? Nothing 
was heard about it afterwards. 

What did their Government do to our industry? Some eloquent words 
were spoken about our not having faith in industrial labour and industrial 
labour not having faith in us. What happened during the Janata Party 
period? Did they have faith in them? ·. Why then did workers vote for us 
if they had faith in them? 

To the world outside and to the people of Indi:;i it .seems as if both the 

. Commun1st parties supported the Janata Party, broadly . speaking. They • .. 
may or may not have voted with it. · Sometimes they did speak against the 
Janata Party, but on every important issue they supported Janata policies 
as today they are also siding with the rightist efoments. 

RAMAVATAR SHASTRI : CPI never supported the Janata Party. 

PRIME MINISTER : You were siding with them then, you are siding with 
them now; and you are doing everything possible to weaken· our effort, 
knowing that your feeble movements will strengthen the rightists. You 
may not want to be rightist; I am not concerned with whether you do or do 
not, but your actions brought in the rightists before and today you are 
strengthening them. And I might tell you what an Hon.:Member·has 
told me. - I asked: "Do you think that bringing in the rightists is going 
to help the country?" He said: "No, it will disrupt the country; it will 
de&troy the country. But they won't be able to touch us." 

INDRAJIT GuPTA : Who is tbis Member? 

PRIME MINISTER : I am not mentioning any names. 
I am not interested 
in what you think about me. All of you have poured the worst venom, not 
only on me now, but on my father while he was alive. Don't think that 
I have forgotten all that. Don't tell me now what you said then, and what 
you have been saying since, and what you are saying now. 
I have ears to 
hear and eye!:> to see and if some of you don't know your own history, I am 
I was with my father. I know what he had to go through. Don't 
sorry. 
make me go into that history because you will be sorry for it. Once befQre 

I said it and then you went on and on criticising ri:Ie for going into such 
matters. He was called a stooge of the British by the Communist Party. 
It is no use shaking your head. If you don't know, keep quiet. 
I am not 
distorting~facts. Never have I in my life distorted anything knowingly .. I 
may make a mistake if I don't know. But this is something l do know, 
because I was very close to the scene of action. 

We have had enough experience of these groupings, people hopping 
It has happenedjn 
from party to party for a long time, not just in 1977. 
different States. But in 1977, not only the Indian people, but the people of 
the world had the opportunity to see how devoted the various parties were 
to their names, to their ideologies and to their policies. Everything was 
swept aside by just one desire: "Let us throw Indira Gandhi out. Let 
us somehow get hold of the chair of power." Our party alone stood up 
against all tl;i.e attacks, all the venom, all the hardship. We kept to our 
name, ideals, and our programmes. 

We have been wedded to.certain basic policies. We have not changed 
those. · . If we consider those policies irrelevant to the. new India we may . 
have to change seine parts of them, but 1 don't think tli.at is ever going to 
· happen, because they are basic guidelines which are relevant to the Indian 
condition, the Indian situation and Indian circumstances. But, as we go 
along, we do have to take some new steps. If something is torn, you have 
It is not some little 
to repair it. Aud this is what we have to do now. 
thing that was torn. The entire structme was dislocated; the railways, 
I did not want 
industry, and other programmes were all totally dislocated. 
to repeat all these things but one has to have the correct picture. 
I have 
been taunted that I promised a Government that works. Do you im!lgine 
that if we were not working, how could we have made such_ progress in coal, 
and the other items? Those, who discredited India's name abroad, are the 
ones telling us that our foreign policy is wrong;:when they see that India 
once more counts. 

NARAYAN CHOUBEY : What about increase in corruption? 

PRIME MINISTER ; Who increased corruption? lt is the Janata Party which 
institutionalised corruption .... 

When people sleep, you can wake them up. But whc:n they deliberately 
close their eyes, then it is not possible to convince them of anything. Whether 
it is in the economic field, in foreign policy or in the overall domestic scene, 
Government has been acting with clarity, decisiveness and vigour. The 
world knows that in India today there is a Government; not a collection of 
disparate groups, some moving from party to party and ultimately lan~ing 
themselves where they are. 

In 1980, we inherited an economy which was heading towards total 
collapse. The decline in our G.N.P. in 1979-80 was 4.5 per cent and the 

rise 'in .· the" wholesale price · was 23 per cent. Today, according 
to the impartiafassessmentQfthe WorldBarik,·our G.N.P. has registered a 
gtowth'rate'of7 to 8 per.cent. The increase in the wholesale·price index 
over the year has··come d6wn:from 23 per cent in January 1980 to 15 per cent 
· 'in Januaty:1981 'and toless'than 9 per centtoday. · I entirely agree that 
unless this ,has an effect on the prices in the· market themselves, there is riot 
much use quotirig·figures to the man in the street. But this is the firststep. 
Unless the wholesale price comes·down, you cannot bring the other •prices 
the growth rate of 
down. The Janata Party did not' even · bring , down 
inflation. ·· 
When prices were sky~rocketing, l heard no voice of criticism from the 
other side. Only towards the end, when the Janata Party was cracking, did 
some }>eo'ple pick up courage to speak. 'Of course, when the party broke, 
they loudly spoke one against· the other. 
I}ut before . that nobody 
mentioned these ri1a.tters although prices had startep. increasing soon after 
they. came to power. 

.There h~s _been persistent ciisr<::presentation about inflation in Ind.ia. 
Nobody with any· senc~ of r~sponsiqilftY can claim that there could be a 
zero rate. of gi;owth in inflation: in pre~ent day world conditions. The 
average world rate of inflation was 15 per cent during 1980. The aveni.ge 
for Latin America was 56.6 per cent; for West Asia, 57.6 per cent; for Africa 
17 :6 per cent. Everi for industrialized cou11tries, the average rate of inflation 
has been: around 11.3 pef cent.. If\ve l1ave been al;>le to contain the rate 
. of inflation inlndia by a series ofprµdent steps t,o iess ,than 9 per cent: cer-
tainly it'io an achievement for which.we can take credit. 

N:ow take, our econo!llic infrastructure. 

inhe.rited an 
infrastructure ,which was in shambles. _We have now brought the key 
sectors-power, coal and_ railwa),'.s-.. back to work. 

In 1980, we 

A MEMBER : What· about accidents .and sabotage?. 

PR~ME ,MINISTER : When you reinstate people who liad earlier committed 
sabotage, who had been disnussed for good reasons; 'do you expect that 
service to work properly? 

PROF. MADHU DANDAVATE : When those who were dismissed even in the 
· 1974 strike were taken back, in. the first year T projected a surplus of 
Rs 65 crore, and it went up to Rs 124 crore. Please go into that. 

. PRIME MINISTER : In everything you had good movement in the beginning. 
That was the momentum which we had left; just as we have had difficulty 
in picking it up because of the stideback you left behind. 
If the country 
had not slid back, we would have gone much faster. 

SBLBCTBD SPEECHES A.ND WRITINGS. OF INDIRA GANDHI 

In the Railways, the Budget for the current financial year envisages a 
loading of 20 million tonnes more than last year, i.e., 215 million tonnes, 
against 195 million tonnes. Out of the additional 20 million tonnes, nearly 
12.5 million tonnes of additional traffic has already been loaded in the first 
five months of the current financial year. We are confident that we shall 
exceed the Budget er.timates of 215 million tonnes and make it a year of the 
highest revenue-originating loading ever. achieved in the Indian Railways. 
The railway moved 15 per cent more freight during the first quarter of 
this year compared with the same period last year; and power generation 
increased by 17 per cent compared with the same period last year. With 
regard to coal, it has registered an increase of 9 per cent over the same period 
last year. 

It is for the people to decide whether the Government is working 

or not. 
Now, take industrial production. We have brought the key industrial 
sectors from a stage of stupor to a dynamic growth track, as will be evident 
In the first quarter of the current year, 
from the fi.gures·about production. 
there was 26 per cent increase in the production of saleable steel, 46 per cent.· 
in fertilizer and 20 per cent in cement. From a level of mimis 1.4 per cent 
growth rate in 1979-80 the growth rate for industrial sector today is 11.1 
per cent plus. 

We are tightening up the public sector. 

Its professional management 
is being improved. We have placed the highest stress on maximising internal 
production of oil. As you know, the Petroleum Minister has just announced 
that we have succeeded in cutting down our oil imports by Rs 1,000 crore. 
This is not an ordinary achievement. 

Many people have referred to the fact that fewer man-days have been 
lost. That is again an achievement. Still, we had to have the Essential 
Services (Maintenance} Bill, not.because, as somebody has tried to suggest, 
we don't have faith id workers. They have so bravely fought for India's 
freedom; on them rests much of the burden of industry. Nor do we have 
any doubts whatever about their loyalty or their efficiency. We have no 
doubt about the patriotism of our workers. I do agree that in times of crisis 
they have stood by us. Then what are we afraid of? We are afraid that 
there are enough people wanting to mislead them for political purposes-
not for any gain to the workers themselves. And that is what I am trying to 
answer. 

During the recent strike in Defence production installations, we not only 
fell back in our production at a time when we desperately needed to increase 
it, but we lost Rs 137 crore. This is the problem. The man-days lost 
may have been fewer overall, but in certain key areas, there was a situation 
wWch could cause great harm. The man-days lost in Defence production 
were 36.20 lakhs and you know how important Defence production is for 
our country. 

. ,-, f 

DEMOCRACY AND NAT~ONAL STRENGTH.· 

Indian Airlines, in the year 1980-81, made a profit of Rs 2.48 crore. 
· Air-India not only covered its losses, but, during the first three months of 
1981-82, made a profit of Rs 1.98 crore. 

Even in agriculture, in spite of many uncertainties of the monsoon, 

we hope to have a comfortable year. 
tainties of rain that we decided it was good to import 'grain at a time when 
it was easily available, rather than later being held to ransom by unscrupulous 
people. 

It is as an insurance against uncer-

The public distribution system, which had been completely disrupted, 
has been enlarged and improved. But I should be tbe first to admit that it 
is by no means satisfactory and until it is strengthened and made more 
effective, neither our progran1mes nor goods will be able to reach every sec-
tion of the people, as they should.. That is why all our efforts are directed 
towards this end. 

Our emphasis was on improving the infrastructure, because we felt that 
was basic for any other programme. It is not true to say that we are not 
concerned.about unemployment; we are; but you cannot remove unemploy-
ment by wishing it away. We have concentrated on what we consider to 

. be the basis a~d the foundation, . which is the infrastructure. . That . has · 

If all things go well and 
improved and it is improving and it will improve. 
with the.efforts that we are putting in, once the infrastructure is stabilized, 
it will be a sort . of jumping-off ground for many other programmes. It 
is only when you increase production that you can provide greater employ-
ment in industries. Each activity is linked: industry is linked with agriculture 
and agriculture is linked with industrial production. 

Several people have spoken about our loan from the IMF. · I was 
rather surprised to hear some of the arguments used and long quotations 
from the Birla Institute. No country today can keep away from inter-
dependence. Our point is not that there should not be interdependence, 
but fuat interdependence must rest on independence. This is the message 
which India is projecting all over the world and trying to implement here 
in our country. But when we found the state in which the economy was 
.. left by the Janata Party, with the huge, unprecedented budgetary deficit, it 
was evident that we must raise new resources if we were to go ahead with 
our big Plan. Either we did that or we did nothing. The Finance Minister 
has assured the House, and I would also like to add my voice to it, to say 
that there is no question whatsoever of giving in to any conditions which 
go against our declared policy accepted by Parliament, or against our national 
interest. That we have definitely told the Monetary Fund and all concerned 
who have approached us on this matter. It is because conditions for deve-
lopment are favourable if ouly we can get this initial help that we have gone 
in for a big Plan and for the IMF loan. 

Of the insinuations made, some are ideological but many are ill-informed 
and irrelevant. _ This is not the first time that we have borrowed from abroad. 

·r • i ., 

But at no time was our economy intrinsically stronger or our own negotiating 
position .better than it is now .. ·. Every country in the world knows that my 
Government is not the one that can be pressurised· or pushed around 
politically, economically and militarily. 

So far as the domestic scene is conc:erned, no one can accuse nie of 
complacency,· We are not at all complacent. We see the dangers ,.of the 
situation and we have not .lowered our guard. Weaknesses and dangers do 
abound and we must fight them but, at the same time, we must not belittle 
our own strength. · The danger of communalism .is persistent· and so .long as 
there are extremists and fanatics, be they Hindus, Muslims, Sikhs, Christians, 
or any other, we simply cannot rest; we must try and change the atn1osphere 
in the country. This is not mainly a question of law and order or of 
punishing some. people. What we need is an atmosphere of brotherhood. 
Tolerance has to spread. There is now a new phenomenon to . which my 
attention was drawn in Biharsharief. People feel that the trouble there· was 
poiitically motivated. Those who met me were not my party people. · I 
had gone at hardly a moment's notice and people from all sections were 
· there, 

The Jamshedpur Inquiry report clearly brings out the kind of evil-doers 
that are at work; and you know thatit is partlybecausel have fought against 
communalisl)l all my life, .not now but even before independence, that much 
of this attack and venom has been poure4 .upon me. RSS, to me, is the Jan 
Sangh. You can change the name a million times, but it will remain Jan 
Sangh. Nothing can be more insulting to our great leader Mahatma 
Gandhi than to say that the Jan Sangh is adopting his ideology. Do they 
take us for fools? People have only to read the speeches of the earlierleaders 
of the RSS like Golwalkar, what they spoke about Mahatma Gandhi and 
his ideas and policies. 

ATAL BIHARI VAJPAYEE : Madam, I wish you had read their speeches . 

PRIME MINISTER·: I have ... I talk with deep conviction and with very deep 
It is not a nice thing for me to say that anybody 
anguish, Shri Vajpayee. 
in 011.r country should hold such views about a person like Mahatma Gandhi. 
But you did feel that way. 

ATAL BIHARI VAJPAYEE : Jan Sangh was founded in 1951 (Interruptions). 
This is not Gandhian approach. This is the Indira Gandhi approach. 
If you want to adopt Gandhian socialism, you will never say this 
(Interruptions). 

PRIME MINISTER : They think that we are the only people who should be 
tolerant and should listen to all kinds of abuse, character assassination and 
so . on.~ They can't listen to even one word. Talking about character 

' ' f! -

assassination, an Hon. Member of the Opposition-. I forget who it, was, 
Shri · Dandavate~ I think-said that he wlls not interested in character 
assassination But he sat very quietly while it was being indulged in by all of 
you· opposite during · those . years.· 

l do not want to go into the cases against me. But one case I do . want 
I ~wonder whether you know about it. J had to go all the way 
to mention. 
to Imphal, Manipur, on a non-bailable warrant. Do you know what the 
charge yras? I was supposed to be an abettor to a person who had stolen 
two chickens and six eggs! This was the high esteem in which the Janata 
Party held character and democracy. And the person in charge was the 
judge, he was the prosecutor, he was the persecutor, he was the Government 
Advocate-Generalof Manipur, and the chairman ofthe·commission.as well! 
• I have no hesitation in saying that communalism and casteism are worse 
than almost any other threat we have. Both are two sides of the same coin 
and the most reprehensible of all anti-national elements. We can. easily 
nieet external threats. But communalists, as I have said many times,. are · 
like white ants- who eah1p the wood or thegrain from within.··. And the RSS 
is not alone in this. 
It has good co1npany. or bad company; in conu-i1unalists 
of other hues and denominations. 
I don't say there are communalists in 
only one religion. They are there in all religions. And .anybody who is 
fanatical in that way feeds the fires of fanaticism in other extremist groups. 
Therefore, we have to worry against them all equally. 

Ever since the present Government assumed office, it has accorded high 
priority to the maintenance of law and order which is essential to ensure 
an. orderly life to the community. We have addressed ourselves with 
earnestness to this primary task and as a result of concerted efforts, th.e 
situation has shown improvement in spite of attempts by certain elements, 
certain politi1:al parties, to organise agitations on every conceivable issue or 
nondssue. · · In the past few months, there has been a perceptible fall in the 
incidence· of violence, murders and intimidation. · Of course, crimes have 
not stopped. There are incidents of organised thefts and robbery in certain 
areas. But, I think, we can say that as a whole the law and order machinery 
ha:s been;successful in curbing the activities of anti-social elements. 

It is not we who released them. 

· ·When the Jartata Patty ·came in, the anti-social elements, smugglers 
and all were released; 
It is the J anata 
Party who released them. Some of these anti-social elements were actually 
honoured at receptions and garlanded; pictures appeared in the newspapers. 
Now to say suddenly, when they have been let loose, that we should capture 
them all, is not -realistic. Somebody mentioned Galadhari's name.· It 
might interest the Hon. Member to know that it was in 1-977 that these people 
were removed ·from the list of suspects. 

RAM JE.THMALANI : It is a wrong statement. Please check from your 
records, Mada:in; . 

PRIME. MINISTER : I have been given this information from the records. 
Why should I invent.it? I knew nothing about them or what cases were 
there against them. 

Offences against women are really a shame on all of us. 

I am told 
that they are showing a decrease and that the law and. order machinery is 
vigilant. With the amendments of the Criminal Procedure Code, .I.P.C. 
and the Evidence Act, it is hoped that these will come under further control. 
This is an area in which public opinion and the opinion of the neighbours 
are very important. 

Our Opp0sition friends get very excited if we talk about West Bengal or 
Kerala. They can talk about any State they'like, but if we mention West 
Bengal 01 Kerala, all of them get up. I am not going to say anything more 
except to ask: Can you honestly say that the law and order situation in 
Kerala is all right? Our people are being killed, but not so many as people 
of other parties. 

M.M. LAWRENCE : From 1959 onwards, we know what happ~ned; 

PRIME MINISTER : I am glad that you have such deep knowledge, but 
fortunately or unfortunately, not all of it is correct .. Just because your 
leaders repeat something in public, it does not become true. But· no one 
who has been to Kerala can deny, whether he is a foreigner or an Indian, 
the large number of political murders. Never in any part of India have so 
many political murders taken place on this scale. 

There is no truth in the allegation that I want to topple governments. 
I do not want to topple any government. My going to the States has been 
welcomed by the Chief Ministers, wherever I have so far been, because 
it enables us to get a better understanding of the blocks or obstacles in 
the impl~mentation of various accepted programmes, specially programmes 
which have to do with the Plan. 
I go with Central officials, or they go 
earlier and then follow up these matters. · We try to help the States in 
whatever way we can. 

There seems to be a lot of rhetoric on moral values and codes of ethics. 
And the question asked was whether my name was used in Shri Antulay's 
I saw no reason for being in the House when it was addressed to the 
Trust. 
Finance Minister. When a question was asked of me in Bhubaneswar, 
I answered it at once. 
I did not hesitate. Had they followed up with other 
questions, I would have answered those questions. I have answered all 
questions. When Shri Antulay told me about this Trust-Shri Kaushal has 
read out its objects-I thought they were good objects. And I agreed t.hat 
it was a good idea to help artists. When I was Minister for Information 
in 1965, many artists came to me with such demands. So, when Shri 
Antulay told me that the Trust was going to help young artists, I thought it 
In that sense I did give my blessings. When he asked for my 
a good idea. 

name, I advised him not to use it, not because the objective wa:s bad or the 
Trust was bad, but because I do not like to give permission for my name 
whether it is a trust or any other institution. There are many such requests 
by Chief Ministers and other 'people .. ·. 

lr-.DRAJI'i' GUPTA : Why did you not say it before? You could have 
said 'it much earlier. 

PRIME MINISTER : Shri Indrajit Gupta, you would, perhaps, have stopped, 
but I doubt whether the others would have done so. 

lNDRAJIT GUPTA : What do you lose? 

PRIME MIN~STER : I am not concerned with gaining or losing. 
I have a 
single-minded purpose of life and I am going towards it. . And until my 
last breath I shall proceed towards it regardless of what. others may say. 
l ani. not interested whether we have this "government or that government. 
l kept working when I was out Or power. I kept 
or who is in the chair. 
working when every attempt was made to finish me off. 
I did not deviate 
from my goal. 
I am not interested in whether I lose or gain. And those of 
us in the Congress Party, who have gone through the crucible of Gandhian 
discipline, are in no need of lectures on ethics and codes of conduct from the 
self-professed neo-converts to. Gandhian principles. 
I am almost tempted 
to quote the Biblical saying : 'Physician, heal thyself'. However, I do wish 
the House and the nation to know that my Government and my party will 
stand for the highest principles of conduct in· public life and ensure that 
those principles of rectitude are not only followed by all those who are 
privileged to exercbe power but .also ensure that they seem to be followed. 
In Garhwal, I have seen with my own eyes who has been beating up whom, 
who has been bashing up whose cars. As I have said earlier; my own staff 
was threatened. 

ATAL B:\HAR,I VAJPAYEE : By whom? 

PR~ME MINISTER : I have told you once before I am not interested in your 
question. My friend here said, "If you had any courage you could have also 
resigned at that time." (Interruption). 

ATAL BIHARI VAJPAYEE : Who could dare threaten your staff? It is your 
own government there. 

PRIME MI~S'I'ER : You would be surprised when there are goondas, they 
certainly dare. 

ATAL Bn:IARI V AJPA'!OlE ·.: When ther:e w.a~ . J>unjab Poliqe and J{aryana 
Poli,qe .....•• 

PRIME MiNISTER : Punjab police was 119tthere; itwent in-a-little Jat~r. ···· 

I have been bashed up by your people a number of times. Who the 
people were, I do not know. But there wer,e . attacks on me during those 
three years, attacks on my life in different parts of India. We have n'Qt 
indulged in such attacks. 

• Now, unfortup:ately, provincialism,was also<.given. a push. • And now 
also there is an attempt to stir up Centre-State antagonism;. We have an 
extraordinary situation in which a State government says, "No, we do not 
accept the Plan but we will take its help." 

My visits to the States have been deliberately misinterpreted. Their 
purpos.e, as I said, was simp\y to brin,g about .better understanding;a11d 

... co-ordination in regard to the development programmes that involveJhe . 

Central and ·State Governni.ents .. Th~y are not inspection tours, We 
,vere not there to see how the State is doing its work. They were problem': 
solving visits and in a 11umperof places the problems were solved and the 
.It certainly would be a sad. day 
situation improved almost immediately.. 
if the Prime Minister of India cannot take interest in the · development 
programme all over Jhe cou11try; . 

• The danger tci peace comes not only from casteism and communalism 
but also from frustrated .people and elements who somehow want to create 
trou.ble and give Government' a bad name. As I said earlier, those who 
th.row stones should. not be siirpr,ised if some stones are thrown at them. 
Parties, whose record while in office and conduct before, after or during, has 
been far from commendable, . are now.:trying to pick holes in: our work. I 
do not say allof us are angels. 
.J\fo party consists only of angels.' We have 
consistently tried, where we found wrongsdojng, to correct it. Jean certainly 
say-that:our party is in a Jar. better shape as- a-party than any.of these, but 
that is your problem not mine. · 

So far as foreign policy is concerned, this is a time of exceptional 
difficulty, and I am sorry that you were not interested enoughtohavethe 
It just shows that you are not interested 
debate on foreign policy today. 
eno\lgb .. 

A MEMBER Tomorrow we will have it.. 

PRIME M1NiSTER : Tomortowit may or may riot come. Nobody knows 
what you will rake up before that. 

Shri Vajpayee-and some of his friends are very fond of saying that I am 
trying to rake up·thefq(eign issue in pi:dercto hide . .som~thing: herei . • X ha.ve 
never wanted-to hide anything. The advice my father gave mein m,rvery 

DEMOCRACY AND NATIONAL-STRBNGTB. 

early childhood was that everything should be open, and that is how I have 
always lived. Therefore, when I see a situation, I also speak up about it, 
and that is why we sometimes get into trouble, because there are lots of 
people who do not like our type of frank speaking. 

There is no doubi: that dangers have increased. This is acknowledged by 

It is even more so in our immediate neighbour-

leaders all over the world. 
hood, though no fault of ours, but nevertheless the danger is there, and we 
have to prepare ourselves. 
You have probably seen this very morning the newspapers have reported 
that a final decision has been taken to accelerate the supply of F-16. to our 
neighbour. As I said before, it is not a question of whether a particular 
country should have more or less, but it is the whole attitude behind it and 
the tension which it is bound to cause, which it has already caused, by 
upsetting the balance, which enjoins on us to be very careful and to see that 
the tranquillity of our area, which is disturbed, should be somehow 
restored. 

Justifying the acquisition of sophisticated equipment which; as· I have 
earlier pointed out, is a generation ahead of what we have, our neighbour 
has made unjustified charges of arms build-up by us: 
In the same statement 
they have also mentioned the Simla Agreement. We have been acting in the 
Simla spirit and we would welcome a similar policy on the part of Pakistan. 
But their actions do not seem to correspond to the concept of peaceful 
bilateral discussion and eschewal of thoughts or policies of military solutions. 
Nor do we think that the sophisticated weaponry which they are acquiring 
is compatible with the Simla spirit. Also, they lose no occasion to rake up 
bilateral matters. 
It was one of the first conditions of the Simla Agreement 
that such matters should be left for us to talk between ourselves. This is 
not the occasion to go deeper into a review of the foreig!l. scene. 
I have 
referred to it because Parliament will adjourn very shortly and I thought I 
should put my anxiety before you . 

We all know the extreme seriousness and the delicacy of the international 
I do not know whether the Opposition does not realise it, or 
situation. 
whether it just thinks that making.trouble is more important. 
I am not 
talking about the House; I am talking of what often happens outside. By 
all this you do not weaken the Government if that is what you hope to do. 
But you do try to create an atmosphere of frustration, of despair. This is 
the most weakening thing that can happen to any community or any country. 
At no tiine have I said that I personally have been able to get better 
production-. In every single speech I have emphasised that it is the farmers 
of India wlio--were willing to adopt new ideas, adopt new methods. 
It is they 
It 
who were able to increase their production and to make us self-reliant. 
is the industrial worker of India who has helped, by his sweat and labour, to 
increase our production and to help us to diversify our industry. At no 
time have we said that we have done this. But we have helped· them with 

our policy, we have helped them by giving direction and, above all, we have 
helped them by giving them hope. . This is what you are trying to take away 
from them. This is where we all quarrel and there are bound to be quarrels, 
whether it is democracy or even if it is not a democratic system; wherever 
there are· human beings there are quarrels and differences. But there are 
occasions when on some issues we should try and stand as one. Of course, 
in war time everybody says, "We are with you", but in peace time also we 
have to see that hope is maintained. The people should never feel that 
It has got a bright future, and we shall go 
this country has no future. 
towards it step by step. By talking in anger, in envy or in desperation some 
Opposition spokesmen are only giving comfort to the opponents of the 
country who go away to report in their papers and in other ways that India 
is falling to pieces. But I know that the greater part of the House and the 
country will stay solidly with us. 

Now, one small point I want to make, which is on leadership. 

I am 
quite distressed that my side keeps on raising this issue. People raise it 
only because we are taunted by the o.ther side. When they see that their 
leader is under attack,they all feel tb.at they lllust rush to rescue her; but . 
they should know very well by now that lam fully capable of lookirtg after 
myself. 

PROF. MADHU DANDAVATE : They come to your rescue only. 

PRIME MINISTER : And also your rescue sometimes! What I am trying to 
say is that although in the Congress Party there has always been a recognised 
leader, this does not mean that the party collapses without that leader. 
When one leader has gone, another has always come to take his place in a 
peaceful democratic manner. Whether the leader is strong or not is impor-
tant, but what is more important is that the party should be solid in spite 
of our quarrels. We do not have the strict discipline which some parties 
!i,ave, whether it is on this side or on that side. We allow our people to talk. 
That is our weakness, it is also our strength. But our party will reniain 
strong, Indira Gandhi or no Indira Gandhi. The Congress Party is a party 
which is giving programmes and policies which will lead this country forward, 
and implementing them. We do not think that we can solve all problems. 
Nobody has solved them in one or two generations. All we can hope is to 
take the country forward in the right direction and to see that it is in good 
hands who can take it further ahead. 

So, I appeal to all the Hon. Members here to defeat this motion of"no 
confidence", bearing in mind the critical days ahead on all fronts and to rise 
to the occasion to preserve our democracy, our secularism, our national 
unity and to scrupulously guard against falling a prey to the forces of 
destabilisation within or without. 

On Defence 
MR SPEAKER, SIR, Defence has always been an important subject but, in 

today's crisis-ridden world, it has become of paramount importance to every 
citizen. There have been many speakers in this debate. Some have been 
content to echo old arguments and platitudes. But I am glad to observe 
that the majority have shown insight into and genuine concern for current 
defence problems. 

It is ridiculous to allege that Government is neglecting defence. 
Nothing could be farther from the truth. 
It is one of the axioms of cabinet 
government that the Prime Minister retains a portfolio only when special 
importance is attached to it. Hon. Members may also have heard the 
familiar old belief that when you want a job well done, entrust it to the 
busiest person.· . 

My colleague, Shri C.P.N. Sirigh, bas already dealt with most of the .. 

points raised by Hon. Members, those mentioned in the cut motions and 
the day-to-day problems of our defence forces. Broadly speaking, he has 
also touched on how we intend to maintain our preparedness in the face of 
mounting danger. 
:t>fy own intention is to put the question of defence in a 
broader perspective. 

In fact, it has met five times since January. 

But before I do so, I should like to refer to a few points. 
Dr Karan Singh claimed that the Committee for Defence Plan has met 
only once. 
I should like to tell 
Shri Indrajit Gupta that over the years, we have developed the capacity to 
design sophisticated combat and non-combat aircraft. Some Members 
have spoken of various deals. There is nothing secret about them. Our 
effort is to choose the best suited to our needs in performance and cost. 

It is difficult to refer to all the Hon. speakers. For once, I have been • 

present throughout the debate and have heard every speaker. General 
Sparrow, Shri Gadgil, Shri Bhagat; Shri Rajesh Pilot and other members of 
our party have made useful points, as have members of the Opposition. 
I also specially appreciate those who have spoken for the first time. Shri-
mati Shaktawat, the last speaker, made good points and was perhaps about 
to make more good points. 

I hope she will let us have her views later on. 

I should like to tell Shri Lawrence that we ourselves are concerned about 
people. going abroad for various types of training and we are looking into 
the matter. A couple of Hon. Members have strongly advocated the atom 
bomb. The policy somersaults of Shri Vajpayee and the Bharatiya Janata 

Reply to debate on Demand _ for Grants for the Ministry of Defence, Lok Sabha, 
July 19, 1980 

Party are astonishing only to those who have not observed the birth and 
chameleon-like evolution of this party. Shri Swamy is equally inconsistent 
in his opinions. The Jan Sangh-now the BJP-used to be vehemently 
opposed to any friendship overture to China or to Pakistan. In fact, they 
used to ridicule our btand. Both Shri Vajpayee and Shri Swamy used to 
strongly urge us to make and keep atom bombs. But Mr Nixon's visit to 
China and the USA's change of attitude was like a magic wand which 
transformed Shri Vajpayee and many others also. Our own view on atomic 
energy has been quite clearly explained in this House in reply to questions. 
But I shall reite1ate it just in case any misunderstanding remains. We are 
committed to the peaceful u~es of nuclear energy. At the .,ame timt;, we 
must do everything possible to enable our scientists to gather knowledge 
and experience. Also, I should like to ask: Can one really maintain that 
the possession of one or a few bombs would be a deterrent to conflict? 
. totality and to have a correct threat percept~on. . 

Hon. Members have rightly stressed the need to view defence in its 

Defence policy caritiot be viewed. in isolation. It is an integral part of 

lt must have the Closest co-ordination · · 

our foreign and domestic policies. 
with other areas of government. It is intimately linked with the health of the 
economy, the system of indu~trial and agricultural production. The 
prevalence of order and a sense of national purpose is vital. Quite early 
in this century, wars became total war. The work of farmers, of factory 
workers and of housewives is a necessary background for the valour of 
professionals in the defence force~. A people without a sense of direction 
become easy prey to outside machinations. History is witness that when 
people are imbued with faith in their nation, no power, however mighty, 
can subdue them. 

The strength of an individual or of a nation rests 011 its self-confidence 
and its self-reliance. That is the rationale of our green revolution and of 
our industrialization. No one claims that we are anywhere near the 
achievement of our aim; at the same time, no one can deny tB.e enormous 
progress we have made and are. capable of making. The latest example is 
yesterday's satellite launching under the able guidance of Dr. S.S. Dhawan. 
That is why we emphasize not only the adoption, but the correct choice of 
and the right application of science and technology. 

We have talked of self-reliance and there is no doubt in my mind that 
we must bend all our energies towards this end. But situation or problem 
is not so simple. We do not live in a vacuum. Let us not forget that we 
have joined the race very late. We are handicapped by the paucity of funds 
with a system which is slow and with attitudes of mind which look to the· 
immediate and often enough imaginary gain, rather than the long-term and 
more solid benefit. As Alice said in Wonderland, we have to keep running 
merely to stay in otir place, while the others are far in front and racing fast 
ahead. We hardly begin a project when it becomes obsolete in the developed 

countries. How do we compete in the race for petroleum, uranium and 
other scarce and strategic materials? How do we match satellite surveillance 
and space espionage and the open interference in the internal affairs of 
other nations? 

Hence the need to use whatever capacity exists in the country and to 
buy from abroad what we cannot produce. For, this is one sphere in which 
we simply cannot afford to lag behind too much. 

There have been some ill-informed comments in the foreign Press and 
in some political circles on our recent military purchases from the Soviet 
Union. Self-reliance cannot preclude purchases from abroad, particularly 
a certain proportion of advanced defence requirements. However, we 
have adopted the balanced and wise policy of not being dependant on any 
single country for our supplies. This has given true underpinning to our 
non-alignment. The contracts that our defence team concluded in Moscow 
have been made to appear cumulatively. large but they represent the 
aggregate of several agreements which have been under discussion for. some 
. considerable. time. Absolute necessity and financial. prudence are. O"t+f 
watchwords, . A third consideration is that, to the extent possible, imports 
should be dovetailed with don1estic production programmes and should not 
inhibit indigenous design and fabrication capacities. 

The Defence Ministry's report has briefly outlined the progress of defence 
R & D and the work done by our ordnance factories ·and the Defence public 
sector undertakings. I have admiration for our Defence scientists and design-
ers. We appreciate the work they have done on designing a new battle tank, 
an armed light helicopter and our naval R & D. But I do not know ifeven 
now we make the best use of scientific talent. Antiquated administrative rules 
dampen and discourage their innovative capacities. For, innovation involves 
risks and the possibility of making mistakes. No one begins at the top. 
But with the right encouragement, the leeway between us and other countries 
can be made up. Our defence forces demand and deserve the very best. 
We are only sorry that we cannot always provide them with what they need. 
Negligence in any sector may leadto harm. However, we should remember 
that while we may purchase good tanks, good aircraft, good ships, defence 
itself cannot be bought. This is what makes self-reliance so crucial. 

So far as the Jaguar 

is concerned, we have a Men1orandum of 
Understanding with Aerospace. We shall adhere to its terms. However, 
where the discretion lies with us, we shall exercise it in the best interests of 
our country. 

While innovation and the general capacity of the total industrial 
structure shape defence production, defence as a whole depends upon the 
vigilance of the people. 
Some Hon. Members, including Shri Indrajit 
Gupta, have rightly expres1,ed concern about the use of the Army to help 
in maintaining law and order. But there are occasions when, for various 
local reasons or circumstances, the police is not fully effective. And even 

worse, when there are threats of secession and insurgency situations, the 
Army does have a legitimate role to play. The Army fortunately enjoys a . 
high reputation for impartiality. 
It is sad, but significant, that parochial 
and divisive movements have tried to undermine public regard for our 
defence.forces by making false accusations against them. 

Any form of domestic um est weakens our security, and, if it occurs in 
the border areas, it is even more harmful and it may provide a cover for all 
kinds of dangerous elements. The prolonged agitation in the North-East 
has put different types of ideas into some people's heads. Articles are 
appearing in foreign newspapers depicting it as a secessionist movement 
and hoping that India's wings will be clipped. 
I am sure th.at not a single 
person in this House or in the country at large can countenance anything 
that will damage the integrity of our motherland. 

Every country's defence policies and decisions rest on its threat 
perceptiop. .. We know from where we have .been threatened in the past; 
But dangers can emerge from other directions also: Shri Panigrahi made 
. an important point, namely; thaf allies and groupings . change. . Some. 
alignments seem obvious today but we. cann_ot guess what combination may 
confront us in any future conflict. We just 1nust be prepared for any 
eventuality. This is no small responsibility with over 15,200 km of land 
frontiers with half a dozen neighbours and 6,000 km. of sea coast open to 
the entire world. 

The Indian Ocean has ceased . to be an area of friendship. The 
unanimous voice of the littoral States is unheard and unheeded. The 
increase in the naval presence of outside Powers in the Indian Ocean has been 
· going on for some time, but it has quite dramatically increased in the wake 
of developments in Iran and Afgbanistan. This has contributed considerably 
to escalating tensions in our area. These developments do pose 11. potentia.l 
threat to the stability of all the littoral State&. The military 1:ruild-up in 
Diego Garcia will have a chain reaction. 

The best way to win a war is to prevent it. That is why we have been 
trying so hard for peace. The Foreign Minister has already spoken of our 
initiatives with our immediate neighbours. Today, the whole world is our 
neighbour. That is the rationale behind our policy in Afghanistan and 
elsewhere. The destabilising developments which have taken place in 
South-east and South-west Asia, have also brought the menace of confronta-
tion closer to us. There does not seem to be a single country which does · 
not feel uncertain about its own future. Even the missiles and nuclear 
stockpiles of the great Powers have not freed them from nervousness. 
In 
· the last decade, there was a gradual recognition of the futility of the arms 
race, and this prompted the · search for an alternative arrangements to 
limit strategic arms with the ultimate aim of reducing them. But in recent 
months, detente has had a setback. Suspicion lurks behind words and-
actions. 

DEMOCRACY.AND NATIONAL STRENGTH 

Events in Afghanistan, unpalatable to many as they are, are not sufficient 
reason to jettison detente. My talks with leaders of Europe gave me an 
i4ea of how perturbed they are at the prospect of open conflict. 
In that 
they will be joined by a large number of countries of Asia, of Africa, and 
Latin America. The aligned, no less than the non-aligned, have a stake 
in peace. 
I should like to appeal to the great Powers to act with the 
responsibility that their own military capabilities enjoin upon them. They 
cannot afford to make errors of judgment or to act rashly. 

The over-all global security environment as well as the security situation 
in our own neighbourhood have deteriorated. Events in Afghanistan, 
which include the armed encouragement given to insurgents no less than 
the induction of Soviet forces, have created serious instability too close for 
our comfort. 

From the very first day my Government took office, we have striven to 
use our influence to moderate hardening attitudes and to pull nations back 
from the brink of a fighting war towards which they seemed to be rushing. 
We shall consistently endeavour; through our deep conimitment to the path 
of peaceful negotiation, to convince other ·nations that there isno problem· 
which cannot be solved through discussions or which would justify recourse 
to hostilities. 

The Janata Party Government, in a misguided effort to .earn the 
applause of some elements abroad, criticised our stand and adopted what 
they thought was a softer posture towards our immediate neighbours. 
should like to assert that at no time have we been unreasonable. We 
were and shall continue to be firm if our national" interest or security is in 
any way menaced. 

throughout our country. 

I would be failing in frankness if I did not give expression to our 
uneasiness at the reported plans of various countries to arm Pakistan. Even 
as it is, Pakistan's per capita expenditure on qefence is ·well over double 
Reports of Pakistan's nuclear progra1nme have caused 
of ours. 
widespread disqu'i.et 
I hope that the absence 
of mechanisms of public opinion and public accountability in Pakistan will 
not serve as an encouragement to confrontation. The possibility of 
Pakistan developing nuclear weapon capability in the near future has come 
up for discussion in various forums recently. Government is aware of 
the serious implications of Pakistan acquiring this capability. We hope 
that the Government of Pakistan will live up to its pledge to gear its nuclear 
programme only to peaceful purposes. 

No remarks on defence can be complete without paying tribute to 
the gallantry and bravery of our jawans and officers. Our country 
. has been the victim of aggression several times. 
It is well known that he 
who commits aggression, he who attacks, has a tremendous advantage. In 
spite of this, because of our preparedness, because of the quality and 
training of our defence forces, we have been able to give a good account of 

ourselves. Our officers have given true leadership, not just in guiding and 
advising, but by being in the very forefront of the fighting and face to face 
with danger. We should be and we are truly proud of them. We are 
aware of the sacrifices which the officers and men have to make and the 
hardship with which they have to put up and also of their dedication in 
times of peace when they rush to the help of the afflicted in nature or 
man-made calamities. For all this, we are grateful. That is why we have 
concerned ourselves with the welfare of the serving personnel and the retired, 
of their families and widows and with the problems of their re-employment 
and resettlement. Not all grievances and demands are fulfilled. 
I am well 
aware ofit. But we are trying to take them up one by one. 

Once again, I reiterate that the objective of our defence is not war but 
peace. We do not ever want to begin a war. But if any one plans to attack 
us, we must let them know in unambiguous terms that they will be up against 
a strong · defence force and a resolute multitude which is united with 
singleness of purpose in the defence of their motherland. 

ON DEFENCE-2 

PARLIAMENT IS THE country's watchdog and this debate on Defence 
Demands provides Hon. Members with an opportunity to fulfil this function 
· in a very crucial sector of our lives. All sections of the House ate united 
in their concern for the safety and integrity of our country. Many important 
and useful points have been made in the course of the debate as well as 
in the earlier debate on External Affairs, for Defence and Foreign Affairs 
are closely inter-related as many Hon. Members have mentioned. 
In 
fact, they are over-lapping. 

A special feature of our Defence Forces is their closeness to our social 
milieu. 
'They form an integrated part of our community. We are a nation 
of agriculturists. 
It is the farmer's son who tills the land, who seeks 
employment in our factories and who joins the 'Defence Forces. So, the 
Jawan is very much in touch with the problems of our people. Secondly, 
whenever the Armed Forces have been called upon to aid civil authorities, 
whether during natural calamities such as floods or drought, or in restoring 
supplies and services essential to 
the community, they have acquitted 
themselves with great credit. 
In remote and border areas, and, even in 
places which have come under our control during war and later returned, 
we have found medical, health or other essential services sadly lacking, and 
our jawans have not hesitated, in spite of their other work and duties, to 
come to the relief of the local community. 

Reply to debate on Demand for Grants for the Ministry of Defence, Lok Sabha, 
April 9, 1981. 

Since a speaker was boasting of his close contacts with the Army, I 
might also say that I have visited all our border areas and was even able to 
go to some of the Pakistan areas that we had captured. There I was 
approached by the local population asking me: "Why can't these people 
remain to look after us?" 

DR. KARAN SINGH : I was not boasting; I was proudly recalling. 

PRIME MINISTER : I should like to congratulate our Jawans and officers 
on their commendable spirit of service. 

Within the constraints of resources, my Government has attempted 
to provide as much as possible for the Armed Forces, be it for essential 
modernization or for their overall well-being and rehabilitation. 

Another point which I should like to clarify is that the Committee 

on Defence Planning is not a part of the Defence Ministry. 
. ministerial organization with representatives from Finance, · Planning and 
Exten1al Affairs. The Cabinet Secretary is the chairman. ·. 

It is an inter-

I take this opportunity of reiterating the commitment of Government . · 

to maintain the Armed Forces in a state of total preparedness which must 
naturally take into account not only equipment, but that everything possible 
is done to keep at the highest level the morale of the Defence personnel. 
Normally, when we make plans for modernization, we have to keep all 
developments in mind, because there is no point in making a plan which 
ignores the various even.ts around us. 

In peace 

The discipline and the courage of our officers and Jawans are well 
recognised. 
time, when the nation's attention may not be 
focussed on them, they continue to guard our frontiers, some of them in the 
· most trying circumsta~ces; 
inclement climate and far removed from 
their families or any type of social life or amenity. They bring dedication 
to their duties. 
I should like to convey to them, on behalf of the 
Government and on my own behalf, and I am sure the House wffl join me 
in this, our appreciation and greetings. 

Of course, there are problems. The Forces have to be kept always in 
fit and fighting condition. A youthful profile has, therefore, to be 
maintained and because of this as many as 70,000 personnel are retired 
annually at a comparatively young age. Finding alternative occupations 
for them is a national responsibility. We do treat this question with a sense 
of urgency. A series of measures have been taken for the welfare and 
rehabilitation of ex-servicemen. The State governments and the private 
sector industries have been urged to keep this constantly in mind. Our 
ex-servicemen are disciplined _and trained, and there is no reason why many 
of them cannot be gainfully employed in various developmental activities. 
Sir; I was astounded to see that- one of the cut motions implies a lack 
of feeling of national integration amongst our Defence Forces. I am sure the 

rest of the House will agree that, on the contrary, it is they who set a good 
ex.ample to us in this matter. Some cut motions asked for a substantial 
increase in the Defence budget. While I share the concern of Hon. 
Members, I must remind them that it is not our intention to build a war 
machine or to compete in the arms race. Our aim is primarily to prevent 
others from disturbing our peace and our development. Our resources 
are limited. . Defence is an integral andimportant part and yet only one part 
of our national endeavour. It cannot be built at the cost of socio-economic 
development nor would it be effective without a strong economic base or a 
united, disciplined and contented people. 
In these circumstances, we have 
made the most judicious allocation· of resources for the Defence sector. 
For the year 1980-81, we have provided an increase of Rs 200. crore 
over the sanction in the Budget Estimates, and for the year 1981-82, we · 
have proposed a .marginal increase, raising the total Defence budget to 
Rs 4,200 crore. This increase takes into account the rise in the cost of 
equipment and in the provisions for pay, allowances and . pensionary 
benefits. While soine members want us 
to. cut down our Defence 
expenditure, others feel that we are spending too much. 

As a percentage of gross national product; our expenditure on Defence · 

is one of the lowest in the world. 
In 1979, it was: India 3.9; USA 5.2; 
USSR 11.13; and UK 4.9. For Pakistan it was 5.7. in 1978; we do not have 
latest figures for Pakistan and they are not available. Similarly, our Defence 
expenditure as a percentage of Central Government expenditure is also low 
compared to that of most countries. But we do our best that the needs of 
the Defence Services should be fully met and not suffer for shortage of funds. 
Our programmes to modernize all wings of the Armed Forces are 
continui~g in the perspective of the security environment of the foreseeable 
future. ~hemes have been sanctioned to increase the fire power, the mobility 
and the means of communication of our Army. While our efforts for 
indigenously developing our main battle tank are_9ontinuing, we have, for 
the intervening period, procured a newer generation of battle tank. The Air 
Force has acquired greater punch with the introduction of MIG-23 aircraft 
and the Jaguar. For the Navy, we have embarked upon a programme of 
refitting older ships and obtaining general purpose frigates and mine-
sweepers. Negotiations to procure SSK submarines have reached an 
advanced stage. 

Self-reliance remains our guiding principle in this as in other spheres 
of activities. The new Defence Research and Development Department is 
engaged in designing and developing sophisticated equipment. We are 
encouraging the growth of ancillary industries around defence production 
establishments. Our ordnance factories are producing a wide variety 
of stores ranging from machine-guns to bombs and anti-submarine 
projectiles for. the~ three Services. Some notable achievements in the 
production field have been the manufacture of medium machine-guns 

fitted largely with indigenously produced components, the development 
of the 9-mrn auto-pistol, air field lighting equipment, etc. 

The best defence is the prevention of war and that is what India has 
been involved in during all these years and that is the major preoccupation 
of our foreign policy. Since our Foreign Minister has dealt very lucidly 
and comprehensively with our thinking on these matters, with our relations 
with other countries, and especially with our neighbours as well as with 
recent developments in .the Non-aligned Movement and other relevant 
questions such as the North-South problems, I do not need to go into these 
agam. 

There is near, if not total, unanimity in the world on one point : never 
in the last two decades has the international outlook been as grim as it is 
today. This is not merely my own assessment but that of scores of world 
· leaders from five continents whom I have met in this past year. 
I am not 
given to alarm or exaggeration. Yet, I must warn that at ·this time we 
simply cannot afford to be complacent or to sit back hoping that matters 
will somehow be sorted out. 
It will take the most earnest exertion of ·an 
countries to somehow hang on to peace and to prevent the situation from . 
exploding or drifting towards disaster. · The basic responsibility for peace 
lies with the big powers. Their attitude of confrontation will engulf all 
others. Much that happens in smaller countries is often the result of such 
outside manoeuvres and manipulations. Yet countries like ours, which are 
not big powers in the military or any other sense, can and must pull their 
the 
weight 
consolidation of our independence, for the building of our economy and, 
indeed, for our very survival as nations. 

individually and collectively. Peace 

to us 

is vital for 

There is actual fighting in more than one part of the world. Many 
other areas are like powder kegs ready to blow up at any 
inadvertent 
striking of a match. The focus of the cold war has shifted from Europe 
to the Indian Ocean littoral. As has been said, our South-West and South-
East Asia flanks are flash points. New armaments are being piled up in 
our region, not only around the Indian Ocean but in a number of inland 
countries. 

We are told that the purpose of the militarization of our area is the 
containment of the expansionism of one big power by the other, and of 
ensuring the stability of the Gulf region. 
In our view, this policy is 
It will virtually prevent a politically negotiated 
counter-productive. 
settlement in Afghanistan, nor will it bring peace to the Gulf and South-
West Asian region. The security of the Gulf should primarily be the 
responsibility of the Gulf countries themselves who should not allow 
external interference. or pressures in the shaping of their future. 

The unresolved crisis in Afghanistan and the continuing conflict in 
Iraq-Iran have given encouragement to the hawks of many countries. We 
continue to be deeply concerned that there are as yet no signs of improvement 

··r'. I I 

SBLBCTED.SPBBCHBS AND ~Gs·oFINDiRA GANDHI 

in Afghanistan. We stand firmly for the ending of all outside presences 
in that country as well as elsewhere, but it would be wrong to think that . 
there is only one foreign intervention. Our advocacy of a political solution 
to this problem has assumed even greater relevance than when the trouble 
began, because of the increasing entanglement of the big powers in this 
entire region. Any solution must obviously balance the views of all 
concerned parties. 

Developments in Afghanistan have given Pakistan an excuse 

to 
demand more arms, and to other countries to supply them. We are also 
disturbed that a mischievous campaign has been started in some quarters 
to suggest that Pakistan needs to be strengthened because of India's 
designs. This point is patently ridiculous and untrue. 

Every country has a duty to look after its defence. But, let us remember 
· that in the last ten years, Pakistan has doubled its defence strength. Yet 
we did not protest them. But the present moves · introduce a qualitative 
difference. Now, Pakistan's defence seems once again to be becoming part 
· of a largest strategic alignment stretching from the Atlantic Ocean . to th.e 
Pacific Ocean, to say nothing of the Indian Ocean in between. This is what 
worries us. 

We welcomed Pakistan's entry into the Non-aligned Movement. But, do 
their new intentions fit in with non-alignment or are they going back to 
their old policies? 

Officially, Pakistan has denied that it is planning to produce nuclear 
weapons. But these denials have not allayed the fears and suspicions any-
where in the world. In fact, it is in the countries of the West that detailed 
accounts hav~ been appearing about Pakistan's nuclear preparations. It 
should be clearly understood that Pakistan's development of nuclear bomb 
will have grave and irreversible consequences on our subcontinent. We have 
kept our eyes and ears open. We are fully aware of our responsibilities and 
the House can be confident that we shall respond, in an appropriate way to 
any development. Our own policy has been to use nuclear energy only for 
the total banning of all nuclear 
peaceful purposes and we crusade for 
weapons. 

The Pakistan Foreign Minister, Mr Agha Shahi, has been here twice. 
In response to his invitation and in pursuance of the Simla Agreement, 
our Foreign Minister will, I hope, soon go to Islamabad. This visit will be 
in continuation of our patient approach in dealing with Pakistan since the 
Simla Conference. Some leaders of the opposition parties have been pleased 
to say outside the House that lndia with its size need not be afraid of Pakis-
tan. We are not afraid of Pakistan or of anyone else. Size itself is not 
strength. In fact, without unity and discipline, it can be a liability. But we 
do car~ very much for the tranquillity of our region and the stability of our 
neighbourhood. I had expected greater far-sightedness from such experi-
enced leaders. 

DEMOCRACY AND NAT~ONAL STRENGTH 

. We have expressed our serious misgivings directly to the United States 
Government through our Ambassador and through Shri G. Parthasarathi 
who had gone to the United States on some other work. The response of 
the United States will be known by its actions. Our efforts at friendship 
and co-operation continue and will continue. But, at the same time, we 
must not ignore the realities or dangers of the unfolding situation. India has 
never resorted to any step which might be taken as a threat to our neighbour-
ing countries. Indeed we have repeatedly assured them of our policy of res-
pect for their sovereignty and integrity. We want them to live in peace and 
stability. In fact, the pace of socio-economic development in our own 
country is linked with events in our neighbourhood. Jawaharlal Nehru's 
words uttered 25 years ago that "the cold war has come to our door-step" 
is true once again. The gains made through patient international diplo-
macy over the last 30 years have been swept away by the hot winds of belli-
gerency. The situations in Afghanistan and the Gulf, serious as they are,· 
are not half as menacing as the resumption of the cold war. The powerful 
nations of Europe and America seem to have a special fl.air for fighting 
their wars on the soils of the u:Iider~developed and developing countries 
of Asia and Africa. Added 
to this are the ocean waters of our 
region. 

We are alarmed at the pronouncements of some major spokesmen of 
the US Administration which have created disquiet even amongst some of 
their close allies. We hope that as that Government studies the complex 
international situation in greater depth and with grnater understanding, it 
will appreciate the need to de-escalate tensions. Experience has shown that 
military solutions are short-lived and give rise to new problems. Hence no 
opportunity for a dialogue should be missed. Proposals like those of Presi-
dent Brezhnev should be looked at in this context. The big powers have 
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of peace. Hqt recent history 
has shown that the big powers do not always get their own way. Other coun-
tries can do a great deal to generate the right atmosphere and to mobilize 
the voices for peace. 

Some have alleged our dependence on a particular country. This allega-

tion is quite baseless. It shows how people, and even Hon. Members of 
Parliament, are. influenced by the propaganda of vested interests. This is 
even anti-national as it reflects on the morale of our Forces and our people. 
We have built a strong techno-economic base. And, whenever we have 
had to buy equipment from abroad to keep abreast of the latest technological 
developments, we have carefully compared the pros and cons of various 
offers and have decided the source of procurement only in the best interests 
of our country and after ascertaining the equipment most suited 
to our 
needs. Keeping in view cost effectiveness, we have, in our inventory, equip-
ment and materials not from one country alone but from diverse sources 
which include France, Germany, Italy, Sweden, UK as well as the USA 

and the USSR and also from some other countries. In the matter of sup-
plies of spares, no country can blackmail us in times of need. 

India is not only a large land mass but comprises also a large num-

ber of islands which are strategically situated and vulnerable to external 
threats. Their defence is a matter of direct national concern. Foreign ves-
sels. are showing undue interest in these outlying islands and in our seas. 
We are taking steps to strengthen the security of those.islands. 

A point which was mentioned when I visited our islands on both sides 
-Lakshadweep as well as the Andamans-is that normally when we speak 
of the length of India we say Kashmir to Kanyakumari. And, it was very 
forcibly brought out that both Minicoy and Pygmalion· Point are much 
more to the South. 
I request Hon. Members that when they refer to the 
size of India in future, to keep this in mind. 

This brings n1e on to· the larger issue of the oceans around us. Our 
seas are vital frmn the point. of view of security, from the point of view of 
natural resources and communication· and of our environment. All these 
years a few .big powers considered the oceans as their preserve. Global 
attempts have been made in recent years to bring about an acceptable· 
iliternational regime of ocean management. But even these have met with 
In the meantime, we 
opposition and have recently received a set-back. 
must be vigilant to safeguard our legitimate rights. We have been and are 
strengthening our Coast Guard Organization, and new legi$lation is being 
proposed to deter poaching in our waters. A new Department of Ocean 
Development is being set up and this will be followed by the establishment 
of an Ocean Commission. 

External threat need not always take the form of a military invasion 
or an attack from outside. Other subtle moves destabilize countries and 
damage their national fabrics. Outside elements ~eem to be showing a great 
deal of interest in fomenting fissiparous movements within our country and 
encouraging those who indulge in violence. Some time ago, I had drawn 
attention to elements in the North-East which advocated secessionist 
tendencies. Today, similar irresponsible and even more sinister claims of 
separate nationhood are being heard from other parts of our country-
astonishingly even those parts whose sons and daughters have contributed 
such hard work to the development of our Nation and sacrificed so much 
to the defence of our borders. 

I want to deal with another question to which an Hon. Member referred. 
He concluded on what I had said about civilization. Civilization is not 
synonymous with industrial development of affluence by itself. And, when I 
referred to civilized people, I mean those who are civilized in mind. I think 
it is an American who. wrote if I remember the words aright : 

"Ill fares the land to hastening a prey 
Where wealth accumulates and men decay." 

f',,. 

DR. KARAN SINGH : It is Oliver Goldsmith. 

PRIMJ3 MINISTER: Yes, Goldsmith. So our endeavour is to build that kind 
of man. It is a very long-term goal. But we hope that step by step we shall 
get nearer to it .... 

As Hon. Members are aware, defence is strongly influenced by and is 
dependant on many other factors. This is one of the reasons why I have 
kept Defence with me, to forge closer coordination and to introduce more 
effective institutional arrangements. Modern security implies defence plus 
foreign policy plus self-reliant technology. It rests on the soundness of the 
economy, on political cohesion and social harmony. But, in the ultimate 
analysis, it is the people who count, their morale, their commitment and 
patriotic determination. As one Hon. Member pointed out, the Vietnainese 
had neither money, industrial capacity nor military equipment worth the 
name. The people were poor and short of almost all their needs. Yet, the 
manner in which they rallied and united; matched their .strength against 
the, mightiest and, prevailed, is the, saga of our times. Our own freedom 
, struggle is a shining example of the power of wiil, endurance and , perseve-
rance. The Indian people have this quality in abundant measure. Let us, 
the political parties and all others, not fail them or our Defence Forces, 
by diverting attention or dissipating energies on non-issues. 

I urge on the Hon. Members to withdraw their cut motions and to adopt 

the Demands unanimously. 

The Economic 

·scene 

Our Concept of Productivity 

IN TECHNOLOGY, the race is not for the slow or the self-satisfied. Nations 
like us have to run to stay in the same place. If they have to advance they 
must constantly improve their performance. Productivity is thus integral 
to progress. 

In other countries, productivity is equated with mechanisation and the 
increase of output per person. The price for this has had to be paid in terms 
of higher capital investment, greater consumption of energy as ·well as en-
vironmental deterioration. We, in India, have to guard ourselves against 
moving into this concept of productivity. Our productivity movement should 
not be imitative of western norms. We need higher utilisation .of our 
· man-power, with due regard to our constraints of capital and energy: It is 
. particularly regrettable that the capital output ratio in Indian industry is 
worsening. This trend needs to be reversed. 

The Delhi Productivity Council has completed twenty years. It has 

my good wishes for continued success. 

Boosting Power Generation 

I AM ~OT really making an address. 
tion to ~ertain points which seem to me to be important and which, I hope, 
you will keep in view not only in your discussions but also when the time 
comes for implementation. 

I just want to draw your atten-

It seems to us that shortages inthe supply of power have become recur-

rent and endemic. They have had and are having a very adverse effect on 
the economy of the country. 

Failure to operate the installed capacity efficiently is one of the major 
reasons for this situation. The plant load factor of thermal power stations 
which was 55 per cen(in 1976-77 has plummeted to 45 per cent in 1979-80. 
Since thermal power plants account for over 60 per cent of our installed 
capacity, this leads to a bad situation. Another reason is the failure to bring 
on line the plant additions to capacity in time. 

Message to the Delhi Productivity Council on its twentieth anniversary, New Delhi, 
April 25, 1980. 
Speech at a meeting of the State Power Ministers of Northern and Eastern Regions, 
New Delhi, June 20, 1980. 

It is obvious that this state of affairs cannot continue. The gap bet-

ween demand and supply must be bridged. The rate of growth of generation 
should at least be 10 per cent ahead of the rate of growth in de1nand. Power 
development must be planned on this basis. As considerable damage has 
already been caused to agricultural and industrial sectors, the question be-
fore us is how to revive the performance of the power sector. While growth 
in generation due to additions to capacity will take time, there is consider-
able scope for short-term solutions which will result in much better utiliza-
tion of the capacity. All concerned agencies, whether the Central Electri-
city Authority or the Electricity Boards or the Ministers of Power at the 
Centre and in the States, should bend their energies towards this. This is 
not the time for apportioning blame for the present state of affairs. There 
is need for a greater spirit of understanding and a sense of urgency and, above 
·all, for team spirit in the Central and State agencies so that everyone can 
together cope with these urgent problems. 
We are aware that there is an area of Central responsibility to be dis-
charged. The supply of coal to the thermal power stations shouid improve 
in quantity and quality. The B.H.E.L., the organization -for repairs· and 
production of spares, has to be further geared up. 'iVherever outages are · 
repetitive in character, there must be a pooling of experience to find quick 
solutions. The quality of equipment and its timely supply should receive 
greater attention from the public sector companies manufacturing them. 
Similarly, construction agencies in the public sector which are handling 
most of the big works of new projects must organize themselves to com-
plete the projects within the scheduled periods. 

In respect of thermal projects where we are increasingly in a position 
of turning to local skills for erection, commissioning as well as running, I 
hope sufficient care has been taken to see that special types of skills are 
available. For instance, maintenance of boilers is very different from the 
maintenance of turbines. Hence, we should ensure that recruitment, train-
ing and placement policies take care of these special requirements. 

Central generation must play a greater role in future in view of the eco-
nomic advantage of large pitheads for thermal stations. Even large hydro-
electric projects, serving requirements of more than one State, could be 
advantageously implemented by the Centre while passing on a reasonable 
share of generation to the States based -011 their needs. Urgent attention is 
to be paid to major inter-State and other transmission lines. Priority should 
be given to the implementation of a Centrally-owned grid. The.area of 
responsibility of the State governments has necessarily to be larger than 
that of the Centre in this field. 

So far as the State organizations are concerned, there is adequate reason 
to believe that the n1ajor problems in the power sector relate to efficiency 
of management. The State governments have a special responsibility to 
ensure that Chairmen and I\1embers of the State Electricity Boards are 

efficient and competitive professional managers who are appointed for a 
period of not less than three years. It will be desirable to have an independent 
selection process to choose this top management team. 

States should not ~How delay in the acquisition of land, placement of 
orders or completion of civil works. The transmission and distribution 
losses in most of the Electricity Boards are high. Savings on this energy, . 
through installation of appropriate technical devices, can be utilized for 
productive purposes. 

States have to take more interest in hydro-electric projects. The time 
taken for the implementation of such projects is far too long. With the 
increasing price of oil, it has become vital that such renewable sources of 
energy are tapped to a greater extent. 

The financial peiformance of State Electricity Boards must improve. 
There should be greater generation of internal resources mainly by greater 
efficiency in operation and better financial management. 
I am told that 
the financial position is worsening because of the non:collection of dues 
from various groups of consumers. · The State governme11ts can do. a great · 
.deal . to improve this· situation. 
As regards rural electrification, the tempo must be maintained so as to 
energise pumping sets in rural areas and also generally to improve the 
standard of living in our villages. The State governments should ensure 
supply of power to farmers for at least six to eight hours a day. Wherever 
there is a roster of supply, the period of supply for each area should be 
notified in advance. 
It should also be ensured that the timing suits the 
people. Farmers have often come to me saying they have been given such 
and such hours and this is the time when they simply cannot function. · So, 
while you may feel satisfied that you have given them power, in fact, it cannot 
be efficiently used. 

Considering the needs for immediate improvement and for saving 
of thousands of crores of rupees by avoiding losses occurring due to power 
shortage I wonder if serious thought should not be given to a system of 
ad hoc incentives to the staff, including top management, in the Electricity 
If, however, 
Boards and Power Corporations where these do not exist. 
incentives are used up without resulting in greater efficiency and performance, 
obviously there is no meaning in having these and other steps will have to be 
taken. 

I have dealt with certain general problems of the power industry and 

what the Central and State governments should do to improve them. 

So far as the Northern and Eastern regions are concerned, I am distressed 
to see that thermal load factors have gone down between 1976 and 1979-80. 
In the Northern region, it has gone down from 58.64 per cent to 42.11 per 
cent and in the Eastern region from 48.93 per cent to 4L2 per cent. Even 
more distressing is tlie fact that both these figures for 1979-80 are less than 
the AU-India average plant load factor of 45.41 per cent which in itself speaks 

SBLBCTBD SPBBCHBS AND WRITINGS OF INDIRA GANDHI 

of a very poor performance. In the thermal power plant operation, there· 
appears to be urgent need for improvement in the plants in Punjab, Haryana,-
Uttar Pradesh, Bihar; Orissa and the Damodar Valley Corporation. 

The problems of the D.V.C. cannot but cause great concern as it is 
located in an important eastern coal belt. Failure in the D.V.C. does affect 
coal and railway movements and also the operation of our steel plants. 
Is the D.V.C. not doing well merely because it is expected to do so? This 
may not be a paradox as there are always elements in our society who try 
to take advantage of the special situation to dictate terms; but in the case 
of the D.V.C., I should like to be assured that the causes of inefficiency have 
been gone into carefully. Staff associations have sent some pamphlets 
detailing suggestions for improvement which, I have no doubt, will be gone 
into by the concerned authorities. 

The Electricity Boards in this region must devote attention also· to 
ensure good transmission on their lines. The capability to handle fluctuations 
should improve. · The co-ordination with agencies such. as 
the atomic_ 
power projects supplying power to the grid must also be good. Without . 
detracting from the meritorius performance of the power generating agencies . 
· in these two regions, I should like to suggest that the procedures and practices 
in the Electricity Boards in the Western region, particularly Maharashtra, 
1nay be .studied. The performance in this region has been better and it will 
be to our mutual advantage to see if we can emulate it in the Northern and 
Eastern regions. 

I am glad that the Minister of Energy has called this conference. Many 
of our Chief -Ministers are new, and, while I welcome all of you, I want to 
give them a special welcome. 

As the Energy Minister has said, and I would like to rei:terate, we at 
the Centre view all our States with equal concern; each has its special 
problems, each has certain advantages and a great many difficulties. We 
are lw.re to co-operate and to help in every possible way. Fron1 time to 
time I an1 distressed to see some people talking about our trying to interfere· 
or to de-stabilize. I can assure them that there is no such thought in our 
minds. The problems before our country, inside and outside, are far too 
grave for this type of activity. vVe must pull our weight together to revive 
not just the power situation but the entire economy, to improve the law and 
order situation and to see that those who are in need of the greatest help, 
that is, the weaker sections and the minorities, get it. 

I would like to remind you that in our country the word 'minority' 
does not refer to any particular religion or one or two religions. 
In ditferent 
States, different people are in minorities. For instance, in Kashmir, the 
Hindus are very much in a minority. There are places where Christians are 
in a majority. There are districts · and States where Muslims are in a 
majority. Therefore, wherever there is a mi_nority coµununity, it must be 
given due protection. Of course, it is not to be at the cost of others, but, 

't .! 

I think the cause of the majority is served only if the minorities themselves 
are able to live in peace and are assured of their normal rights as citizens of 
our great country. 

So, it is in this major task that we seek your co-operation. 

I -have no 
doubt, because of my great faith in the people of India, that, if we really 
put our minds to it and make a major effort together, we can overcome this 
present hump of difficulties and be able to face the dangers in our region also 
with greater cohesion and greater strength. 

Role of Labour 

THIS MEETING HAS been called to enable the Government and the Central 
Unions and their leaders to exchange views on the economic situ.ation which 
is cause for:grave coricern_, -I should like to outline the background to this -
meeting and the n1ain issues before us. -

We must get the country out of the 'low production-high prices' trap 
as quickly as possible. This is not an easy task and needs concerted action 
by different segments of society. The role of workers, who are the key 
It is gratifying that, by and 
element in production processes, is crucial. 
large, Indian workers are alive to their responsibilities and have kept the 
economy going in the face of many adversities, some of which are not of 
their making. 

But, it is clear that the effort so far made is not enough. 

I shall mention 
a few facts which, although well known, will enable you to appreciate the 
gravity of the situation and also our real potential which we have failed to 
realise in full. · I state these facts not for any political point-scoring but 
to remind you that the country and its problems are our mutual concern. 
In a situation where all people are subject to hardship, we must do much 
better than we have so far don·e, whatever the reasons for earlier slackness 
and whatever the difficulties we now face. 

Take a few key sectors of the economy. The production of coal has 
stagnated just over 100 million tonnes for three years. Between 1974 and 
1977 the production increased by 28.1 per cent, while it increased by only 
1.4 per cent between 1976-77 and 1979-80. Another sinew of the economy, 
Its production increased by 65.8 per cent 
steel, registered a similar trend. 
in 1974-77, but the rate of increase between 1977-80 declined to 18 per cent. 
In the same period, the rate of increase of production of fertilizers, so 
essential to augment agricultural production, decreased from 73 per cent 
to 25 per cent. 

Speech at a meeting with Trade Union Leaders, New Delhi, July 1, 1980 

We are only too familiar with the slowing down of activity in other 
infrastructural sectors like railways, power, shipping, etc. It is heartening 
that there are some signs of revival in our ports, coal-mines, etc., but the 
leeway to be made up in an important sector like railways is enormous if 
industrial production has to register a positive rate of growth. The originat-
ing revenue-earning traffic on railways was 212.6 million tonnes in 1976-77 
which slumped by 8. 7 per cent to 194 million tonnes in 1979-80. This is 
truly distressing, for the railways are at the hub of our transportation and 
commerce. They should have supported a much higher level of activity 
generated in the movement of foodgrains, petroleum products, coal and 
other important industrial goods. 

. If this situation continues, we sball only sink.deeper into the morass. 

It is no wonder that such a fall in performance and productivity was 
accompanied by deterioration in industrial relations situation. The number 
of man-days lost due to strikes and lock-outs has increased from 12.75 
million in 1976 and 25.32 million in i977 to 43.9 million in 1979. 
However, there are signs that our large m:ass of silent and industrious working . 
and managerial force and our technical and scientific talent would like 
to end this drift. They and the energetic rural labour force sustain our 
economy and seek constructive guidelines. 
It is the duty of leaders of 
labour and industry to bring about an understanding of national problems 
among workers and employers .and encourage them to work jointly to raise 
the levels of production and efficiency. 

We have assembled today to discuss how best to re-establish high 
standards of productivity and in~ustrial harmony. 
In a democratic society, 
it is understandable that trade unions should compete with each other in 
winning workers over to their organizations. But the system will work 
only if the ground rules and conventions of civilized behaviour are not 
violated, and, indiscipline and violence are f!Voided. 

The tendency to strike work on the part of workers manning· im'portant 
services like cranes in ports, locomotives in railways, generating plants in 
power system and pumping stations in water-works is deplorable, particularly 
when a strike is called by a small group only to take advantage of the 
vulnerability of the situation. No Government, especially in our present 
economic situation, can afford to be cowed down by such anti-social 
demonstrations of irresponsibility by a few. 
I appeal to the trade union 
leadership to reflect calmly on the great damage caused to the economy by 
anti-social elements who infiltrate into trade unions. In fact, I expect that 
you will give a lead in helping us to check this. 

The endemic nature of the poor industrial relations situation in our 
eastern coal belt cannot be viewed with equanimity. Those, who trigger 
off these situations, should realize that their gains will be short lived if, as 
a result of their actions, the nation as a whole loses. 

Public sector enterprises present a strange spectacle of the labour 
fighting its own image, as it were. These· enterprises are national property 
without any exploitative ownership. Yet, even in those enterprises, whose 
physical and financial performance is poor, the labour is fighting for higher 
benefits without a corresponding willingness 
to talk about norms of 
productivity. 

I mention some of these problems to stress the need for constructive 
and far-sighted leadership. Wherever leadership has played a constructive 
role, there has been high productivity and performance. Such leadership 
has been pre-occupied with the redressing of the genuine grievances of 
workers by an effective dialogue with management, and peaceful demons-
trations of solidarity when the situation so warranted. 
.Only too well are 
we aware of the intransigence and unimaginativeness that often plagues 
many managements. Fortunately, . we have several remedies available 
within the a111bit of law and of social and political relationships. 
I shall 
also talk to some leading industrialists regarding this matter and put before 

them your own constructive suggestions on labour-management relations. 

The industrial working class has played a notable role iii our· freedo:ri1 
movement. · Labour leaders like Shri V.V. Giri have occupied positions 
of honour in our national life. Workers have an enormous and vital 
contribution to make in the economic reconstruction of our nation. 
want them to fight not only for their own rights, but also for the rights of 
those who have fewer advantages. The working class must look after the 
interests of the non-working class as weI1, those who, for no fault of theirs, 
cannot secure employment. 

I am anxious that the reasonable basic needs of industrial workers are 
met, that is, the articles of their daily use, health, education, etc. The 
recent budget provides several reliefs to them. I am against the attitude 
which pits workers agaim,t peasants, and, towns again,t villages. 
I assure 
you that the interests of the industrial working class are close to my heart. 
Your views oil the industrial relations law, the bonus law and the 
evolution of tripartite machinery will be given sympathetic consideration 
by the Government. However, at this meeting, I hope you will concentrate 
on how to increase production and productivity so that we are able to 
absorb more persons in gainful employment. 
I should like you to place 
your views before us more on this than on any other matter. 1he Ministry 
of Labour and other Ministries will take careful note of what you have to 
say on various aspects of industrial relations in different sectors. Your 
suggestions will be sympathetically followed up by the Government. 

Labour Laws and Their Implementation 
I AM NOT an expert on labour problems nor do I intend to speak in detail 
about these matters. My major concern is how to salvage our deteriorating 
economy and, there is no doubt, that can only be done if there is an increase 
in production; production of goods for domestic use, for defence purposes, 
there is a good 
for export. And production cannot 
relationship between management and workers. Unless certain basic needs 
of the workers ar.e satisfied, they cannot go ahead and they cannot give their 
best.. with a certain amount of peace of 111ind. 

increase unless 

For you, the Ministers and the officials who have gathered here, there 
is.a heavy responsibility of trying to find out how to.do it. We pass many 
laws.. They are· good laws. ·But. somehow, in the implementation we do 
. riot always find. statisfaction, we .do not always see that the desired results . 
If labour relations are improving and there is a less loss of 
are obtained. 
man-days, I shall certainly be very happy. · But looking at the country 
as a whole, we have not yet turned the corner in the way in which we should. 
The fault is not of labour's always. Sometimes the management 
is to 
blame, sometimes circumstances are to blame. But we are not interested 
iti. blaming anybody but in seeing that the work gets done, that results are 
achieved. 

There is a tendency to think of workers or indeed any category, which 
we may be discussing, as statistics rather than human beings who have, 
apart from their work, problems-ordinary, everyday family problems and 
other problems. Therefore, whoever is looking after these matters m~st 
view the picture in its totality, i.e., how to improve the working as welras 
the living conditions. 

We are not in a position today to give them everything that workers 
get in other countries or that they demand of us because, as you very well 
know, when the Industrial Revolution took place in the West, there were 
no political rights, there was no political revolution; workers were exploited, 
small children and women were exploited, many of them died, many of them 
were blinded or crippled, and there was not a voice in protest until much later 
on. 

And, by the time the protest started coming, the industry was already 
well-established and in a position to meet the demands financially and 
It is only after that that at no stage has something been taken 
otherwise. 
If education was spread, it is not 
as a mark of charity or of sympathy. 

Speech at the State Labour Ministers' Conference, New Delhi, July 19, 1980 

THE .ECONOMIC SCENE 

because people felt that there should be education; it was because the 
machinery became more complex and sophisticated and they needed more 
educated workers to deal with them. But once education came, ideas of 
equality, equal rigµts and so on came, political rights came along with it, 
and then followed the political revolution. 

In our country, we started the things the hard way, as is usual with us, 
and we started with the political revolution, with the idea of rights rather 
than of responsibilities. Now nobody wants to curb the rights of workers. 
But we do feel that the workers, along with all other citizens, should be 
imbued with a greater sense of responsibility also, as only that sense of 
responsibility can help them to get a better life later on or for their children. 
Immediately, the need is to rescue the economy out of the kind of vicious 
circle in which it has got trapped, i.e., low production and high prices. 
Only the maintenance of industrial peace and harmony can bring about an · 
all-round increase "in productivity. 

. I am sure that your conference will devote more tim:e to u_rgeritly'consider 
· how the economic situation can be· improved. You. are ·aware of. the 
. deterioration in economic performance which took place in the last few years, 
. the · decline in production. and · failures on the infrastructure front. All 
these are facts which are known all over the world. We are trying our best 
to salvage matters and to put the economy back on the rails. There are some 
hopeful signs, for instance, in the areas like coal production. We are also 
reviewing our investment procedures and planning substantial increase of 
facilities for production. But productivity must not only keep pace with 
these efforts, if possible it must make every attempt to outstrip them. This 
will fetch dramatic results just as the fall in productivity and poor industrial 
relations can have adverse consequences. 

We are painfully aware of the slide-back in industrial harmony in the 
last three years resulting in heavy loss of man-days in industry. 
It is for 
you to decide and to find out ways and means of remedying this situation. 
Recently, a number of people have been coming to me and saying-although 
I am myself aware of this-that by and large the labour has co-operated, 
and, in the most difficult periods of nation's history, it has helped to increase 
production and put our economy on a sound basis. But, one problem 
does loom large and it is this that these people have drawn my attention 
to. There are instances of one or two people in different cities, individuals 
who terrorise other workers and management~, who indulge in violence and 
destruction of valuable machinery, and even though a vast majority of the 
workers do not agree with this, either due to apathy or fear-I do not know 
what sentiment-· they are not able to raise their voice to control this situa-
tion. And some cities have the impression that they are in the grip of an 
individual or a small group and nobody in the government can help them. 
Now, this is a very serious situation. And it is something for which only 
you, who are in charge of labour, can find a way out. But a way out must 

be found, otherwise anything else that you do for industrial labour will 
just be washed out by this negative movement. 

We have certain machinery for the redressal of grievances, but it (the 
machinery) must be such that it should be able to anticipate problems and 
take preventive action. Once a situation arises, we know that it gets worse 
and worse. But if it can be tackled at the right time, the same problem 
becomes much smaller and easier to deal with. Whether it is the conciliation 
or adjudication machinery, or even arrangements for promoting harmony · 
which are not always visualised in statutes, these should be brought into 
play very quickly. 

Often enough, the problems are aggravated merely because the people 
in charge have not been alert and could not foresee what was about to happen 
about the mental and other barriers that come up between labour and 
management, hardened with the passage of time. The healing touch of 
the labour machinery should be applied promptly to ensurethat these do not 
degenerate into distrust, and brotherhood into bitterness. The State Labour 
Ministries and their functio.nades have an iinportant role Jo play in easing 
I often feel that this role is riot fully appreciated even · 
industrial tension. 
by the Ministries themselves. 
If only they knew of their capacity to solve 
the problems and apply themselves with enthusiasm, our industrial relation 
problems would become simpler. The key function of the Labour l\1inistries 
in the States should be to generate and sustain this enthusiasm. 

Whatever recommendations emerge from this conference will surely 

be given the utmost consideration by the Government of India. 

Some of the issues, which I have just heard in the short time that I have 
been here and which I have also seen on your agenda papers, are such that 
require serious attention, and they can have far-reaching implications on 
our society and on our continuous efforts. to evolve greater homogeneity. 
You have mentioned the problems of:women and child labour, I am 
afraid my views on this are very different to those which are normally 
expressed. We have to face the realities of the situation. Our friend from 
Kashmir spoke of children who are engaged in carpet-making and so on. 
We have the same problem in U.P. and various other places. Now, can we 
I have a case. It happened many 
prevent these children from working? 
years ago in the earlier years of my previous regime. When a factory was 
visited, they found there some boys who were under-age. The factory owner 
was forced to dismiss them. Later on, by chance, he came acro&s these boys 
and asked them what they were doing. They said: 'While we were working 
with you, we had a regular wage; we had regular hours; we had regular 
holidays. Now we are not paid even what the man says he will pay us, 
It was obvious that the children were in a very 
we are not getting food'. 
bad state of health. 

Surely, it is not our intention just to prove to the ILO or somebody 
else that we have certain laws to create greater difficulties for vast number 

Ii 'f 

of our people. We have to face the shuation as it exists in India. If there 
is a situation in which the parents feel that their children must work, then, 
we should see that they work in such a way as not to impair their health 
or their future, by regulating their hours of work, by seeing to their healt~ 
conditions, the conditions of the light so that their eye-sight does not suffer. 
I am only mentioning a few things. But I am giving this as an instance 
because all these things should not just be taken that we should have a law. 
What we expect to get from that law, that is what is important; it is not the 
law which is important. Laws are there to be made, to be removed and 
to be changed; laws are not things which are going to last till the world 
lasts. Laws are there to help human beings, and if they do not help human 
beings, then, you have to think of changing those laws. So, whether it is 
a question of a woman or a child or anything else, the paramount considera-
tion should be : Are they going to truly benefit or not? Of course, 
· exploitation of every kind, whether it is of a man or a woman or a child, 

shouid be dealt with severely arid should· be stopped. 

It is easier to exploit a-child or. a woman than perhaps it is to exploit a 
man. So, from that point of view, they are more vulnerable arid they need 
greater care and attention. But you should also realize that merely saying 
that we should see that the child does not work, is not good for children. 
If you look at the Western societies, what is happening to the children there? 
I certainly would much prefer my child to be working than to be a drug addict 
or the manner in which we see the children of affluent parents in the westen 
world. Most children want to do what their parents are doing. 
If the 
parent is a carpenter, the child would like to work with the father in his 
carpentry shop. You may think that this is a hardship. For him, it is not 
a hardship. 
I am only mentioning this because every single problem needs 
imagination, a certain psychologicl!.l treatment if you are to get the needed 
results. 

W_orkers' participation is one of our Twenty-Point Programme. Again, 
it is not just for the sake of having it there, but, because we consider it very 
important not only for the welkbeing of the workers, for their greater work 
satisfaction, but also for greater production. And I feel the two always go 
together. If you have greater satisfaction of work, the worker will be more 
effective and the output will also be increased. 

I do not know if it is possible to find some way of rewarding people, 

I suppose they get normal promotions or what-

not by money of course. 
ever .... Many many years ago, in fact, it was in 1953 when I first went and 
visited a large number of factories in the Soviet Union, we found that outside 
each factory they had a large board on which the picture of the best worker 
of the month was displayed along with a description of the outstanding work 
he had done, or, the way he had helped to produce n1ore, whether by more 
work or by inventing something or ~giving a new idea. For that month, 
he was a kind of hero to that factory and, of course; he would get very small 

e I g 

things, things which he cannot get there because even the cinema and the 
theatre tickets are controlled. So, they give him the choice: the best theatre 
It is for you to consider 
tickets, bus rides, and all kinds of things like these. 
whether small treats, some small help would be an inducement to our people 
also. 

A point which is of great concern to the whole world is the question of 
bonded labour; how to release them from the bondage and rehabilitate them 
so that they can take their normal place in society. Similarly, there is the 
question of rehabilitating and en1ploying the physically handicapped. 
have written to all the Ministries and, I think, even to the States about this 
matter. And just because I am con1ing straight from my reply ot the 
debate in respect of the Demand for Grants of Defence in the Lok Sabha, 
it is very fresh in my mind-the need to help, to resettle and re-employ our 
ex-servicemen. They give the best part of their life in the service of the 
country, spending most" of their time either in the freezing cold of the 
Himalayas, or in the jnsect-infested jungles, woods and some other places, 
or the deserts of Rajasthari. They lead a hard life,. all the time risking 
themselves for us. So, when they retire, I think it is the nation's responsibility 
to help them to resettle. 
I know it is not easy to do this, but I think if we· 
make a genuine effort, then, at least, part of the problem can be solved, if 
not the whole of it. 

Now we, all of us, here have a collective responsibility towards a large 
number of those who are unemployed. Those who are employed get a 
better deal and their voices are heard, but those who are unemployed-they 
also belong to some of the families of the industrial workers-their voices 
I think every Labour Ministry should make a point of 
are not heard. 
looking after not only those who are labour workers but also the labour 
seekers. You 09uld hav~ a look at the procedures and practices in your 
employment exchanges, in your Vocational Guidance Bureaux and other 
such organizatioi1s so that these organizations functioned more effectively, 
impartially and inspired a sense of security and fair play 1n the minds of 
those who are knocking at their doors. 

I hope that at the conference useful ideas will be thrown up, and even 
more important than giving ideas is to see that they are properly implemented 
so that desired results are achieved and we can move forward in our great 
task of building up this nation. 

Role of Trade Unions in Development 
ON BEHALF OF the Government and peopl~ of India and on my own 
behalf I extend a warm welcome to all of you who have come from various 
parts of the globe for this World Conference of the ICFTU. 

Your theme for discussion is an important one-the role of trade unions 
in development. 
In India, we have always considered organized labour 
as one of the chief agents of social change. Workers played a major roie 
in our freedom stn1ggle, giving rather than asking, sacrificing rather than 
In the last thirty years and more, scores of countries in 
seeking rewards. 
Asia and Africa have become free only to plunge into the second phase of 
the. struggle: the determined endeavour to eradicate poverty with the help 
of modern technology. 

In the earlier stages of the Industrial Revolution in the West, those 
· countries which have now· achieved undreamt of levels of wealth saw great 
accentuation of disparities in their societies. The conscience of reformers 
was aroused. At the same time, more sophisticated machinery needed 
skilled labour, calling for education and training. Also, entrepreneurs 
were made to realise 
that discontent hampered production. Hence 
self-interest and the desire for greater profit were the driving force for the 
series of distributive measures for the welfare of workers. 
This transformation was far from smooth and was pushed all the way 
by organizations of the working classes. · Other theories of development 
like Marxism were evolved. A number of nations have achieved high 
technological capability through varying degrees of capitalist or socialist 
methods, as well as unacknowledged combinations of both. Yet, many 
parts of the world are roughly in the state of England described by Dickens, 
with extremes of opulence and indig_~nce, waste and want. 

The developing countries have 73 per cent of the world's population and 
It is 
69 per cent of the work force, Asia alone accounting for 56 per cent. 
estimated that in about six years, six out of every ten workers in the world 
will be in Asia, one in Western Europe, one in Africa, one in the USSR and 
one in the Americas. Such figures reveal how important it is to give more 
remunerative wages to these six out of ten and to lessen the burdens on them. 
We are asking for a similar reduction of disparities in the international 
community as a whole. 

Problems have been identified and remedies outlined by various 
International conferences have yielded little tangible action. 

Co1nmissions. 

Inaugural address at the World Conference of International Confederation of Free Trade 
Unions, -New Delhi, March 18, 1981 

The UN Development Decades have brought only disappointment. 
International trade has become a needle's eye through which the heavily 
laden camels of affluent countries can pass smoothly but not the thread 
of the developing countries. Yet we cannot and must not despair. Our 
efforts must be redoubled to quicken the hearts and minds of the more sen-
sitive of the affluent countries-and among these count trade union leaders 
such as you. The rich countries cite the interests of workers in support 
of their decisions to restrict imports from developing countries. But studies 
by the ILO, UNCTAD, and the World Bank have all revealed that job 
displacement in rich countries by the expansion of exports from developing 
countries is minimal. 

in 

Development is now found to be a far more complicated process than 
could ever be imagined in the late forties and early fifties. Our people 
are neither lazy nor unintelligent. But, whereas 
the rich countries 
political consciousness followed industrialization, we started the other way 
the West during .its.· own . post-war 
around. The insights gained by 
reconstruction were thought, wrongly as we now :see, to be relevant .. to 
primary development. Each passing year demonstrates that the motive 
force of development is not the same in all countries and that what succeeds 
in one may have entirely different reactions in another. There are no 
universal panaceas. Each country needs vision, competent and dynamic · 
leadership and, above all, a determination to be self-reliant. 
It is for this 
we want international sympathy and programmes of concrete co-operation. 
V,/e can hardly ask international workers' organization and international 
agencies not to press their own ideas of fair labour practices on developing 
countries. There can be no two opinions about the need to ensure safety, 
health and human dignity. But let us look back for a moment. At the 
time of the Industrial Revolution in the West, what were the working and 
living conditions of workers, of women, of children? Vv'asn't 
there 
exploitation of the worst ki_l!d? And didn't those countries also have at 
their disposal the wealth of their colonies? To prescribe the norms currently 
prevalent in affluent countries to those, who are struggling against tremendous 
odds, renders development vastly more difficult and even threatens stability. 
With such enormous leeway to make up, our countries now find themselves 
caught in the spiral of rising costs of wages, capital goods and know-how. 
We are deeply committed to social justice, and in no conditions will we 
use our workers as was done in Europe a century ago. But if our economy 
does not take off, where will the workers or, for that matter, the rest of us be? 
Let not the better be the enemy of the good. 

We do believe in freedom· of expression and organization. There are 
no curbs against the functioning of trade unions. But the power of organized 
unionism has caused some distortions. Similarly, workers must get a 
living wage. But a •Jiving wage' is a relative and not an absolute concept. 
It has to be computed according to the realities of our circumstances. 

THE ECONOM~C SCENE 

Those who have, are able to get more, while those who do not, continue to 
be denied. There is unemployment in most countries today; but the problem 
is far more critical when governments cannot afford to give doles or other 
relief measures. Should not job creation have priority? Can resources 
be earmarked to improve pay scales of the better paid among our workers 
in place of investment in new labour-intensive and employment-creating 
projects? Similarly, class war or any kind of fratricidal conflict between 
one section and another causes untold harm to the people as a whole. 

The multiplicity of trade unions with different political ideologies is 
a serious problem. Some of them are more concerned with enlarging their 
own hold. Not only is production in vital areas held up but sometimes 
even installations are damaged, power-houses and hospitals are shut down; 
the community is held to ranso1n. One of the principal responsibilities 
before enlightened trade union leadership is to kindle social consciousness 
and make workers aware of the problems of the less favoured sections within 
the working classes. 

. There can be no advance without enthusiastic participation of labour. 
·Nor can development expand without the upgrading of technology .. Not 
only labour but technology is the source of weaith. 
In· the earlier stages 
of the development process in any country; technology has to come from 
outside. Simultaneously, there should be an effort to develop it within, 
for solid and sustained progress can come only with self-reliant technology. 
Technology whether imported or home-grown, requires capital which is 
sonietimes in the form of external aid. But it is not possible for a vast 
country like India to obtain from anywhere outside all the capital it 
requires. Capital too has to be mobilized from the savings of the people. 
In other words, a substantial portion of the additional income generated 
by development must be saved and ploughed back into further development. 
This 1n tum means some discipline over consumption, a greater readiness 
to accept social imperatives rather than immediate self-interest. · We, in 
India, have largely financed our development out of our domestic savings. 
We have just adopted our Sixth Five Year Plan. The public outlay 
in it will be 9, 75,000 million rupees or 120 billion US dollars. Only 6 per 
cent of it will be financed by external assistance. Foreign assistance given 
to India might appear large in the aggregate, but in per capita terms it is 
one of the lowest. 

International credit is often tied to particular technologies that are not 
entirely suitable for us. Recipient countries have little choice but to accept. 
Foreign experts prescribe agro-based small-scale industries for developing 
Indian industrial policy is a combination of the big, medium 
countries. 
and small in state as well as private sectors. 
In many areas, it is possible 
to skip intermediate stages of development and to take advantage of later 
If we lower our guard even slightly or there is some lack of 
processes. 
knowledge, we are sold obsolete technology. Developing countries can 

and should decide these matters for themselves, for conditions in each are 
so utterly different. The idea that developing countries can learn much 
from one enother's experiences is gradually gaining acceptance and there is 
considerable necessity and scope for what is called a South-South dialogue 
to run alongside with the North-South one. 

international economic system 

The ICFTU has a tradition of enlightened support to international 
co-operation. There has to be significant transfer of resources. The 
problems of food and energy should be viewed in the global perspective. 
The 
reform. The 
economically disadvantaged nations look forward to a New International 
Economic Order. Making it a reality depends on the exertions of those 
among you who represent and lead the organized and enlightened working 
class of the affluent countries. 

requires major 

We all, different sections of the people from different parts of the 
globe, have tried to take the maximum out of the earth. Mankind has 
fought, killed and ravaged. The time has come to cry 'halt', to pause and .. 
think 
''Whither · man?'', · to match growing knowledge with wisdom and 
understanding, to turn from conflict to co-operation, to forge a partnership 
which will renew the earth's resources and bring· to fulfilment the vast 
potential of man himself, raising him to higher levels of evolution. 

Once again I welcome you and wish you a pleasant and useful stay in 

our country. 

The Sixth Five Year Plan 
THE NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT Council can rightly be described as the High 
Command of planning. It represents the Centre and the States and it voices 
the collective judgement of several parties. 
It reflects the aspirations of 
our people .... 

It·was thirty years ago that we embarked on planned development, but 
the objectives of planning need to be reiterated. Our purpose is to 
modernize the country, to make it scientifically self-reliant, to gain the 
internal strength necessary to lessen and eradictate poverty, to enlarge 
social justice, and to provide enhanced opportunities for education and health 
It is necessary to repeat these because in the 
and satisfying employment. 
last years, the objectives of self-reliance and development were virtually 
disowned; political 'will' had almost turned into political 'won't'. 

Speech at the meeting of the National Development Council, New Delhi, August 30, 1980 

THE ECONOMiC SCENE 

The international environment is every day becoming harder for us-

the developing countries. We are amongst the hardest hit by the oil crisis. 
The global inflation caused by it has upset all our earlier calculations and 
hopes.· Rich men's clubs take care of their own members and we are told · 
to fend for ourselves. For example, although an international code was 
negotiated to which both the United States of America and India were 
signatories, the U.S. has now refused to extend the benefits of these 
provisions to us. As a result, our exports will be subjected to higher duties 
in spite of a clear agreement with them:, fuel . for 
there. Similarly, 
our Tarapore nuclear plant is not forthcoming. One indirect benefit 
of this, however, has been that today we are less impressed by foreign 
advice. 

We are meeting here to discuss the issues raised in the Draft Framework 
of the Sixth Plan. The Planning Commission expects us to give it a clear 
guidance and direction. The time-table for the formulation of the Sixth 
. Plan is very tight, but the last eight months have been well spent in preparing 

a · framework that·· l;>rings out our philosophy and perspective of national · · 
development. 

The situation in which our Government found itself on assuming office 
. was far from happy. The planning process had receded into. the background 
and non-economic issues and pet shibboleths had come to the fore. There 
was no well orchestrated policy to increase production and productivity, 
or, to keep prices in check. The infrastructure had failed to keep pace with 
the needs of the economy and the expectations of the people. 
In the place 
of confidence and forward thrust, there were vacillation and doubt about 
the very validity of our planning. 

We have been able to reinfuse confidence in the planning machinery. 

It has become possible again to indicate the new directions. 

We inherited a machinery that was somewhat broken and disorganized. 
Communalism, casteism and indiscipline were apparent everywhere. And 
here, I would like to express our deep &arrow at various incidents which 
have taken place in India causing loss of life and property, causing lack of 
confidence and creating suspicion between members of one community 
and another. All this slows down the national will and national movement 
It is obvious that the present situation is not 
which we want to build up. 
communal trouble as all of us have understood it over the past years when 
con1munal rioting occurred. There is a definite attempt to make different 
sections come into conflict with authority, that is, with some arm of the police. 
Sometimes, the blame is sought to be put on the Army. So, there is a very 
distinct attempt at destabilization of government functioning, and, this has 
to be kept in view because it has a very direct bearing on what we can achieve 
with our planning. 

The task now before us is to energize the economy. The Sixth Plan 
mu:;;t chart the course of growth and induce investment which will help us 

to achieve our principal objectives of removal of poverty and unemployment 
and the attainment of self-reliauce. 

We look to the State Governments not only to share and advise us in 
this great task, but to help in accelerating the process. 
I firmly believe in a 
relationship of trust and co-operation between the Centre and the States-
based on a common desire to take the nation ahead regardless of narrow, 
sectarian, regional, or even political considerations. 

I may state that some of the State Governments keep on repeating that 
we intend to topple them. 
that this is very far from our 
intention and we have never, at any time in the past or now or in the future, 
had any such desire. On the contrary, we have always tried to give the 
fullest co-operation and tried to smooth out any difficulties which might have 
arisen. 

I assure you 

Economic growth in a country like ours cannot conform to any known 
. model grafted from outsi\ie. We have our diversities as well as our 
similarities. We are. :blessed with-
resources and . yet besieged with . 
shortages. w~ now have a significant manpower which can .. turn. dross .. 
into gold, given the requisite encouragement. Our greatest shortage is that 
of time. The population is increasing and demands are becoming higher 
in n11mber as well as in kind. While we do want to give a fair deal to our 
farmers, our workers and others, we have to invest in agriculture and 
industry and generate surpluses. Vve have to strengthen the infrastructu1e 
and undertake a dynamic R and D effort to reinforce self-reliance. AU 
the time, we have to adhere to our goal of improving the living conditions 
of our poor, of our 1.1,nemployed and underemployed people, and ensure 
equitable sharing of our country's wealth. 

We shall not be daunted by these problems. Adversity has been our 
mentor, our challenge and our companion throughout our journey. The 
collective determination and patience to succeed, that we have so far shown, 
will take us further. We have to acceletate the growth rate. It can only 
be done gradually, but raise it we must from less than four per cent on an 
average in the last five years to six per cent in the Seventh Plan. 

I have referred deliberately to the Seventh Plan because a long-term 
perspective has to be kept before us as we get busy with immediate tasks. 
A large part of the investment in the Sixth Plan, such as for power, transport 
and fertilizer, will bear fruit in the Seventh Plan. 

Keeping in mind this perspective, the current state of the economy, 
the constraints on resources and the need to control inflation, the Planning 
Commission has attempted to arrive at the maximum feasible growth rate 
of about 5.3 per cent in the-Sixth Plan. This order of growth is attainable; 
in fact, it is inescapable. But it is not going to be easy. The crux 
is 
in mobilizing resources. Much as we should have. liked a larger planned 
effort than the Rs.-90,000 crore outlined in the Draft Framework, we have 
to be hard-hearted, hard-headed and practical. Even 
this magnitude 

THE ECONOWC SCENE 

requires a massive effort of resource mobilization. That effort must be 
forthcoming from the Centre as well as the States. 

Resources materialise only if a number of difficult and somewhat 
unpopular steps are taken. Fiscal discipline has to be restored. Wasteful 
expenditure everywhere has to be controlled. We cannot let public sector 
enterprises be run inefficiently and accumulate losses. 
If our pricing 
policies are responsible for such losses, they must be immediately and 
properly revised; but we must guard ourselves against taxing the public 
for our inefficiency. There must be a parallel effort to improve the working 
of public sector undertakings and utilities and to generate public savings 
through them for a higher order of growth. In this process, we should do 
our best to intensify efforts at self-reliance. Among the various capacities 
that we have under-utilized are our scientific and technological skills. 

We have placed new accent on balanced growth of science and 
technology. 
I adhere firmly to my father's vi.ew. that planning is the 
application of science to national problems. This policy has becol\le even 
more relevant · in our present situation when our energy problem has 
worsened. 
Imports of petroleum alone consume. ovei:' 80 per. cent of our 
earnings · from exports. Rapid and substantial increase in exports and 
development of our own energy sources should have priority. 

In any discussion of the Plan, the questions asked about are about the 
size, rate of growth and priorities. As I said earlier, we should have liked 
to place the size well above 90,000 crore rupees, but we cannot escape 
realities. There is some validity in the argument that at the current rate of 
inflation, effective investment may be not much more than envisaged in the 
earlier Draft. But this does not alter the absolute availability of resources. 
The growth rate is not dependant merely on the new outlay, but on the 
increase in our effi~iency in the utilization of capacities already built up. 
As a nation we seem to have become slack. Not only additional production, 
but even the maintenance and upkeep of our existing assets need far 
greater attention. 
In every ·segment of our activity, we must launch national 
efficiency drive. 

the improving of 

Now the priorities. These are : more agricultural and industrial 
production, expansion of irrigation and power, strengthening of technological 
the 
self-reliance, 
transport and communications, 
development of energy resources, the Minimum Needs Programme, 
the 
Rural Employment Programme, promotion of exports, and programmes 
to build the productive capacity of weaker sections. We cannot afford to 
ignore family planning and welfare. This, we have agreed, has to be a 
voluntary programme, but; it has to figure largely in our schemes. Our 
present exercise keeps in mind all these considerations. It lays great 
emphasis on increasing production as well as on equitable distribution 
of wealth and the uplift of the weakest of the weak in our society. Hence, 
the stress is on the Minimum Needs Programme and on the number of new 

thrusts in schemes benefiting small farmers, landless labourers, artisans, 
self-employed, etc. Special attention must be given to Harijans and tribals, 
to women and to our minorities. They must be enabled to live and work 
in safety and in dignity. People of different areas which have, though no 
fault of their own, been economically backward due to lack of communi-
cation or other historical reasons, must also be specially looked after. 

The new Sixth Plan Draft is before you. 

It is for you to give it a 
businesslike direction. You will naturally look at problems in the context 
of your own State since that is the area in which the implementation and the 
effort has to be made by you. But I should also like you to look at each 
problem in the larger national context, because it is only if we have that 
feeling of a concerted, united functioning and effort that we can succeed, 
and each of you individually can succeed in your tasks. 

Towards a Brighter Future 

PROGRESS IN A . country of India's size and diversity depends on the 
pa1ticipation and full involvement of all sections of the people. This is 
possible only in democracy. But, for democracy to have meaning in our 
circumstances, it must be supported by socialism which promises economic 
justice and secularism, which gives social equality. This is the frame for 
our planning. 

The Planning Con1mission is to be congratulated on the manner in 
which it has worked practically round the clock to bring out the Sixth Plan 
in a year as we had promised to do. The drawing up of this plan pose<;). 
special difficulties. We faced a plan gap and a budget gap at a time when 
the whole world, and India more, than other countries, was hard hit by 
inflation, the continuing rise in the price of petroleum, when the price of our 
raw materials remains static, as well as other political and economic tensions 
and international confrontations. 

In view of the severe financial constrictions and the political expect-

ations, it is not surprising that the plan should be unsatisfactory to 
many. However, this is no reason to denigrate it. Planning is more than 
the putting together of a number of Central and State government projects; 
it is a direction. And this the Sixth Plan provides. Once the nation is 
clear about the path to be followed, the details can be adjusted as we go 
along. 

Let us cast a backward glance. 

In the last thrity years, through our 
Plans we have built the foundations of a modern, self-reliant economy. 

Foreword to the Sixth Five Year Plan document, January 1981 

THE ECONOMIC SCENE 

We have achieved self-sufficiency in food, diversified .our industrial structure 
and made significant progress in science and technology. The continuity 
of the planning process, with its thrusts and checks, has helped us to create 
and renew national assets and to take up programmes for the amelioration 
of the weakest strata and the uplift of the most backward regions. 
Economic growth must be balanced, it must ensure -self-reliance, stability 
and social justice. All sections should be assured that there will be no · 
discrimination. No society can prosper if merit is not given its due. 

A developing nation must marshal its scarce resources for a concerted 
effort to build its capital base in various sectors of the economy, to enhance 
production capabilities and allow larger savings. Increased output and a 
balanced inter-sectoral allocation of the incremental savings promote 
further developn1ent. So the process goes on. 

The progress so far achieved has been steady and substantial, although 
somewhat slower than envisaged. The very process of development generates 
new expectations and makes fresh demands _on resources. Our goal of self- . 
· reliance was bo:und to strain our external resources. Also, we were not 
. allowed to concentrate undisturbed ·on our development endeavour, for there 
have been frequent chaUenges to national security. Another factor adding 
to · the complication of our development is the continuous increase in 
population, primarily owing to the very success of our programmes of 
public health and epidemic control, as a result of which infant mortality 
has decreased dramatically and life expectancy risen. 

We have resolutely s.tood up to each new challenge. We have come to 
a stage where we can confidently assert that development has contributed 
to strengthening our nation in spite of its regional, linguistic, social and 
It has consolidated our democracy and is guiding 
communal diversities. 
our society towards socialism. We can now spea.k of an India in which 
the fruits of growth will reach to the last. This is a:stage when the planning 
process assumes even greater importance. 

Five Year Plans,are formulated in the perspective of long-term-develop-

ment. This enables us to raise the national effort to match specific goals 
and meet critical challenges. Annual Plans give operational meaning to the 
exercise. Monitoring, review and evaluation procedures help to keep the 
vessel on the course. The voyage has been longer and rougher than we had 
imagined, but there is little doubt about the rightness of the course we have 
charted. 

The Sixth Plan envisages a significant augmentation in the rate of 
growth of the economy with an annual growth rate of over. 5 per cent. 
In 
this five-year period, we expect to see progressive reduction in the incidence 
of poverty and unemployment and also in regional inequalities. Greater 
emphasis has been laid on the speedy development of indigenous sources 
of energy and infrastructural sectors of coal, energy, irrigation and 
transport. High priority has been given to agriculture and rural development 

and allied agricultural activities like animal husbaridry, dairying; fisheries 
and also 
the forestry sector, with accent on the development and 
.conservation. Substantial outlays have been allocated for expansion in 
core sectors and also for cottage, village and small industries as well as for 
programmes to provide minimum needs. 

The measure of a plan is not intention but achievement; not allocation, 
but benefit. We are determined to implement this Plan with steadfastness 
of purpose. Democratic planning means the harnessing of the people's 
power and their fullest participation. We sail on stormy seas. But the 
Indian people have weathered many storms. Their spirit is indomitable 
and it will prevaii. Let us help them to bend their energies with unity and 
discipline in the great endeavour to reach towards a brighter future . 

Revitalizing the Process of Planning 
I WELCOME YOU all, Chief Ministers, other Ministers · and my colleagues 
in the Central Government. 
In the National Development Council last 
August, we decided to expedite the Sixth Plan exercise and to bring the 
Plan before the National Development Council in early 1981. We have 
adhered to this schedule. The National Development Council should 
place on record its appreciation of the effort of the Deputy Chairman, the 
Members and the staff of the Planning Commission whose hard work has 
made this possible. 

The Plan of Rs. 97,500 crore witlr a projected growth rate of just over 
5 percl';ntisthebest we could do in our present circumstances. Some feel 
it has not gone far enough. Others say that even for this size, 
it will be 
difficult to· mobilize resources. Perhaps, the correctness and appropriate-
ness of the size of this Plan will be established as it represents the optimum 
effort between what is highly desirable and what is just possible. Only by 
reaching out far more than is in our grasp can we bring out the best in 
ourselves. 

To us, the Plan represents more than just outlays and growth rates. 
It implies a commitment to the objectives of development, to the revival 
and revitalization of the process of planning after a dark spell. 

In successive Five-Year Plans over the last decades, we have achieved 
significant progress in several directions. The production of foodgrains 

Speech at the meeting of the National Development Council, New Delhi, 
February 13, 1981-

THE ECONOMiC SCENE 

Industry has gathered 

has achieved a measure of stability that enables us to manage drought years 
without importing foodgrains. 
strength and 
considerable sophistication. Our technical and scientific progress, our 
accomplishments in space technology and the adaptation of appropriate 
technology in industrial products are indeed encouraging. Our scientists 
have given a good account of themselves as increasing areas of activity 
have acquired scientific content. Yet vast potential remains untapped. 
We must make fuller use of our modern science and technology to advance 
our social and economic objectives. 

The industrial structure has been diversified and, thanks to our policy 
of import substitution which now allows us to consider measures for libera-
lisation which we began introducing from 1975-76 in many areas, it can now 
successfully withstand foreign competition. Today, we have reached a 
phase of industrialization where it should be possible for us to pay for our 
· inputs by the export of manufactured sophisticated engineering products 

.. nd other non-traditional goods . 

. ·We. undertook planned development to eradicate poverty, reduce 
inequalities;·.promote employment and minimise regional·disparities. The-
development of our economy in the last thirty years has certainly enhanced 
our ability to deal with basic social and economic problems. Our economy 
is now much more broad-based and diversified. However, we are conscious 
that very much more remains to be done. 

The international economic situation, particularly in the last few years, 
has been beset with uncertainty. The continually rising prices of crude 
petroleum and of imported capital goods, combined with growing protec-
tionism in industrialized countries, have considerably aggravated the task 
of development. The rising costs of raw materials and other inputs have 
also resulted in difficulties for our public sector industries which have been 
forced to absorb a S;Ubstantial part of the increase in cost unlike private 
sector industries which have been able to pass on the amount to consumers. 
This trend must now be corrected to enable public sector undertakings to 
function efficiently. The Central and State Governments should pay serious 
attention to this sector so thatit can effectively perform the leading role 
assigned to it in our development plans. 

In the last three to four years, the domestic economy has also displayed 
many disquieting features. 1979-80 was a year of negative growth, rising 
prices and social discontent. While the outlook for growth is bright again, 
we continue to have problems with prices and supplies. 

The removal of poverty and the achievement of self-reliance are basic 
objectives of our planning. · The goals of the Sixth Plan involve a singifi.cant 
increase in agricultural and industrial production as well as a more equitable 
distribution of the fruits of economic progress among various sections 
of society. The Plan lays considerable emphasis on measures designed 
to increase productivity and employment and to improve living conditions 

of small and marginal farmers, landless labourers, scheduled castes, scheduled · 
in drought-prone and hill areas. It also 
tribes and of people 
includes a number of development programmes catering for their special 
needs. Effective implementation of these programmes is essential to make 
a significant dent in poverty and under-development. 

living 

1981 is the International Year of the Physically Handicapped. We 

have to take up programmes for these useful members of society. 

This year also marks the beginning of the 'International Drinking 
Water Suppiy and Sanitation Decade 1981-1990'. The goal of this Decade 
is to provide safe drinking water and adequate sanitation for all by 1990. 
I hope the States will give thought to this urgent matter and link it imagina-
tively to irrigation, health and rural development. Machinery to co-ordinate 
the agencies handling these sectors should be devised so as to launch the 
.The Ministry of Works and Housing will keep 
Decade from April 1981. 
in touch with you about this . 

. To achieve the targets of the Plan, we must have the active co-operation 
· of all sections of our· society in the form of discipline, hard work and a 
. measure of saci·ifice, particularly from those who are better placed, . whether .. 
in rural or urban areas. In the implementation of various schemes · and 
programmes,. Panchayati Raj institutions should have an iinportant place 
and the efforts of government agencies should be strengthened by the active 
co-operation of local non-official bodies. 

Industry and labour must also contribute. Maximum use must be 
made of installed capacity, industrial peace must be maintained and 
significant improvement brought about in iabour-management relations 
and the levels of industrial productivity. 

We have seen in the last few decades, how the benefits of successive 
If the Sixth Plan 
plans have. got diluted.by the growth of our population. 
is to give iangible oenefits to our people, it is of the utmost importance 
for our family planning and welfare programmes to be implemented with 
drive. Central and State Governments must enthiase voluntary agencies 
in this important component of the Plan. 

The ambitious, but essential, goals of the Plan can be achieved only 
if adequate resources are raised. Fortunately, State Governments have 
undertaken a big responsibility to raise resources so as to have higher outlays. 
Because of this, large outlays, particularly on agriculture and rural develop-
If these promises to our rural areas are to be 
ment, have been possible. 
fulfilled, the States must not falter in raising the promised resources. Any 
default or deficiency in this will seriously hinder our Plan effort and affect 
the erring States even more as their outlays will get curtailed. The States 
must concentrate on the effective implementation of projects and 
programmes and, above all, on restraint in non-Plan and unproductive 
expenditures. They must try their utmost to eliminate losses in their public 
undertakings and to raise resources for productive investment. It is also 

important for the States not to ignore the economic consequences of the 
measures they take in certain areas like the fixation of agricultural prices 
or the writing off of dues, etc. Such decisions should not be taken under 
pressure of agitations or other events but should be well considered and 
co-ordinated with those of other State Governments and the Centre. 

Central Ministries will also have to adopt and implement policies that 
will promote the fulfilment of the Plan, maintain price stability and 
favour the flow of credit to weaker sections in magnitude and terms. 

A certain amount of unevenness in the allocation of resources among 
competing uses is inherent in the very process of planning; but we should 
be collectively conscious of the dangers of neglecting any area or section 
of the country that may remain backward while others go ahead. In a 
federal set-up, there is greater need for understanding on all the mutual 
problems among States as well as between States and the Centre. The 
. devolution of resources to the States and 
the pattern of distribution 
of Central assistance have been subjects of a great deal of discussion over 
the. years. A balance of relationship has been reached by trial.and error, 
· but there is always · scope · for 

these · arrangements. · 
Discussions can continue on these matters but we should not get distracted . 
from our main commitment to our people. 

improvement in 

If we do not implement our programmes with speed and efficiency, 
people will not be impressed by national debates and dialectics on how things 
should have been done. A plan is as good as its implementation; and the 
National Development Council is the best forum to sort out problems that 
arise in implementation. 
I should like to assure State Governments that 
the Centre will continue to be sympathetic to their aspirations and sensitive 
to their suggestions. 

May I remind you that our Five Year Plan is not just a document 
describing national targets and policy framework for their realization. It 
is a charter that we periodically give to ourselves to redefine the course of 
It 
our nation's progress. 
symbolizes our resolution to dedicate ourselves, all our efforts and energies 
to forge ahead. After the recent vacillation, indecision and retreat 'from 
progress, today India is once again firmly set on her chosen path of 
fulfilling her destiny. Let us go forward in a spirit of goodwill and 
partnership. 

It crystallizes our hopes and aspirations. 

I give you all my good wishes for the successful fulfilment of our Sixth 

Five Year Plan. 

Socialism Suited to Our Needs 
I AM A little sorry for those who have neither the perception to see a job well 
done nor the grace to give credit, where it is due, to those who have achieved 
such a complex and delicate task in record time. It is unfortunate that some 
come merely to criticise; but I do not think we should take it too seriously 
as it has become a matter of routine. 

Some specific points were made to which I would like to make a passing 
reference. For instance, the Chief Minister of Maharashtra said something 
of a particular alignment. Now, I think he knows very well these matters 
· are decided by various expert committees and we have hardly any hand in 
it at all. The Chief Minister of Meghalaya objected to the word 'reduction' 
arid hejuxtaposedit with 'removal'. Now, from 'reducti9n' we can and must .. 
move on to 'removal' of imbalances . and· inequalities. 'Removal' remains .. · 
our ultimate goal, but we have to pass through the phase of 'reduction' . 
before we can get to 'removal'. 

Some have accused us of jettisoning socialism and democracy. Some 
years ago, in the discussions of previous Plans, I used to take such comments 
quite seriously and to heart, and compare what we were told other countries 
have done; but this time there is a very big difference. I can ask them 
on whom do they want us to model ourselves. The Chief Minister of Bihar 
said that we could not do what some other countries have achieved because 
we have a democratic system. But I would like to point out that not so long 
ago certain countries used to be mentioned here as worthy of emulation by 
us. Yet, at least one so-called ideal society continues to import vast quantities 
of grain from every available market, specially the capitalist markets, while 
our 'bourgeois' policy has made us self-sufficient. The trouble with many 
of our leftist friends is tfiat they continue to think in archaic terms and in 
grooves of ideas which have long become outdated and which even the most 
orthodox socialist countries have given up. 

In socialist countries, there is now not only greater but visible emphasis 
on giving up controls and rigid regulations in favour of incentives, individual 
initiatives and market forces. It has not yet started working but they are 
doing. Socialist countries and China, which many of our leftist considered 
as their models, are openly welcoming foreign investment, technology and 
even multi-nationals. 

Our socialism is a logical development of the concept of democracy 

suiting the requirements of our system. It builds on the mobilization of the . 

Remarks at the concluding session of the National Development Council meeting, 
New Delhi, February 14, 1981 

private initiative for the greatest good of our society. It is based on mixed 
economy where the public sector plays a dominant role but the private sector 
is also allowed to grow fully to modernize our economy, involving all 
people in the national effort in our democracy. Our leaders chose this mixed 
economy consciously and deliberately and we intend to keep to that which, 
we believe, will take us perhaps slowly but certainly more surely towards 
socialism. I have said before and I have no hesitation in repeating that we 
do not believe in doctrinaire theories. 

In Marxist terms, what is of paramount importance today is the growth 
of productive forces, a change in our society which facilitates such growth. 
At the present stage of our history, that is the only way we can modernize 
our economy and benefit even the poorest sections of our country. Better 
distribution of income and the growth of productive forces are interdepen-
dent. We simply cannot have one without the other and it is obvious that 
over the years our public sector has come to dominate our planning schemes. 
Our socialism reinforces our democracy and our secularism. I believe; 

th~re can be no socialism without democracy;nor can thetebe true democracy . 
without socialism, especially in the circumstances of our society. 

I have had considerable opportunity not only of studying and reading 
but visiting countries, discussing their systems, their difficulties and their 
achievements, with almost all the major countries and a large number of 
other countries. In fact, it would be easier to name the countries I have not 
visited than to list those where I have been, and, I can say with great emphasis 
that there is no country today, whether they call themselves communists, 
socialists or capitalists, where there is no discrimination of some kind or 
another, and this usually works against those who are weaker groups there. 
There has been some talk of class bias along the usual propaganda lines. 
Our Plans and programmes are designed and are being constantly reviewed 
to redress imbalances, old ones and the new ones when they crop up, and our 
Minist_er for Planning has already given some of the figures of what is to be -
undertaken in this particular Plan for the weakest and the poor sections. 
All the impartial observers who have known our villages, many who have 
lived for as long as twenty-five years and done very thorough research, 
have commended on the steady progress of our quiet revolution. We do not 
claim that the progress is satisfactory or that major and serious problems do 
not remain. We are keenly conscious of deficiencies and also of the fact that 
those who have, whether they are in the top bracket or whether they belong 
to different sections, do manage to take greater advantage of the programmes. 
Unfortunately, this is so in. all systems and all over the world. 

Much was said about exports and replies have also been given both by 
the Minister and, I think, even the Finance Minister and the Chief Minister 
of Bihar. But I would like to reiterate, because a lot of misunderstanding 
has been generated on this issue, that self-reliance does not mean isolation, 
or to insulate ourselves from international trade. This would mean return 

to medieval times. Self-reliance implies our being able to pay for our imports 
by our exports and not depending on others for our own requirements. 
You will have noted that the world has become more and more inter.: 
dependan( 
· We not only need to earn foreign exchange but we need our 
exports to have closer contacts with other countries and specially to help 
the developing countries. We also need then1 to enable our own people to 
earn more. 

Aid as a percentage of imports has come down from 26.9 during the 
Second Plan period to 12.8 during the Fifth Plan period, and to less than 
ten now. This is our progress in self-reliance. Of course, we shall accept 
foreign aid where essential. But we are becoming less and less dependant 
on it as our own growth efforts gather momentum. We do not promote 
exports for the sake of exports. Nor do I think that exports reduce avail-
ability of goods in the country except for a very very transitory period. · In 
a modern society, international trade increases the availability of goods, 
and expands the. possibility of production and of consumption. 

No,v, the Ministers have ~lready spoken about the Scheduled Castes · 

and Scheduled Tribes, but I only warit to say that this is the first Plan in which 
special Central. assistance will flow to the Scheduled Castes arid Scheduled 
Tribes and a special component Plan has been devised for them. 

The Chief Minister of Himachal Pradesh referred to vanishing forests. 
As you know, this is a matter about which I feel very very strongly as it 
is affecting our economy in very serious ways. In this Plan, special steps will 
be taken for the protection of basic life support system. This is also the first 
Plan in which great emphasis has been laid on energy conservation and the 
development of new sources of energy. 

A number of references have been made here and outside to the problems 
of farmers. I do not think that I need to say once again how much we are con-
cerned about the farmer or how dependant we are on his labour. But this 
Plan has made provision for one of the highest allocations for agricultural 
and rural development sectors, and, I must also mention the national pers-
pective for water development which provides for a realistic inter-State and 
inter-river waters nick. It is time we harness these waters for the people's 
benefit and not fritter our energy in fruitless controversy and litigation 
on the sharing of waters. But we have also to persuade our farmers that 
they also are dependant on the health of the general economy of the country. 
It is not only that the government cannot afford to do more for them if the 
economy sags, they themselves suffer very directly if other sections are not 
helped to build up. 

The Finance Minister pleaded with the Chief Minister of West Bengal 
to assist him with the working of the Banks. May I add my voice that not 
only do we need assistance with the Banks but with many vital industrial 
installations where not only strikes- and other industrial trouble, but even 
sabotage is taking place. 

I am not absolving the managements of their responsibilities. We 
are constantly trying to follow that up and even have instituted studies unit 
by unit. 

There is also always talk about greater autonomy for the States. I 
am not going into the subject. All that I want to say is that more rights 
imply greater responsibilities; and, the Sixth Plan does see such increased 
responsibility devolving on the States to help to implement larger plans 
than before. So, whatever the criticism, our Chief 11inisters must realize 
that there are certain areas of national effort where it is imperative for them 
to do their very best and share the burden of development, specially in the 
procurement of agricultural products. We cannot attain national targets of 
procurement of grains if individual States come up with very meagre 
procurement efforts of their own. Similarly, on the 
'Food for Work' 
programme, the Centre is willing to share the burden; but the States must 
also mobilize their resources for this purpose. Agricultural development 
. has largely to. be achieved by the· States. 
-In industrial development, the .. 
. generation ofpower, the operation of the infrastructural facilities, responsi-
bilities of the States-all these are. of vital importance. If we can generate 
national discipline in these fields, I am sure that we shall be able to reach 
a breakthrough in our efforts. Vie welcome and encourage labour taking 
interest in the wider field of management, but they also must have a disciplined 
cornmitment to greater production. 

I have always asked for and tried to get co-operation of all. I welcome 
discussion with di.fferent sections and Sheikh Sahib's* suggestion of holding 
more frequent meetings of diverse subjects is worthy of consideration. But 
there is a tendency to put forth set v~ews which is not conducive to a purpose-
ful exchange of opinions. Also, amongst us-I do not mean us here in this 
room necessarily-there are parties who do not believe in such exchange of 
views. Many desirable decisions have to be deleted or modified in order to 
make them more acceptable, not that everybody will ultimately agree to 
them, but to make them ·such as to lessen the obstruction in their imple-
mentation. Sometimes, in a desi_re to do something more fast, one can be 
pushed back, as we have seen in certain programmes as well as in many 
different countries. 

I thank all those who have participated, those who have applauded, 
as well as those who have castigated. To us, the views of all are equally 
valuable. Regardless of the reactions of some, we, here in the Government, 
are committed enough and concerned enough about the country's problems 
to continue to try for an atmosphere of co-operation for a concerted and 
united endeavour to make the Sixth Plan a vibrant and meaningful exercise 
for the welfare of the people. Our approval of the Sixth Plan today should 
dismiss the dismal prophecies about our future; it is a signal of buoyancy 

*Sheikh Mohammad Abdullah, Chief Minister of Jammu & Kashmir 

SELECTED SPEECHES AND WRITINGS OF INDIRA GANDHI 

of spirit and self-confidence. And I am sure that we will go from this hall 
with a renewal of enthusiasm. 

We, in India; can stand with our heads high in any part of the world 
because our system has worked and is working. We do not put the lid on 
its weaknesses but put it on its achievements. If you are able to do something 
in your State it is because we have built the base, and, no matter which is 
the party in any particular State, it will not be able to function if the Centre 
is not stable, strong and capable of helping them. It is not only those who 
are in opposition to our party, but even within our party, our Chief 
Ministers often function with a large measure of autonomy. 

The Indian Path of Development 
I AM GLAD to be here to share in your pride Oil tluB occasion-· ~he golden 
jubilee celebration · of the Indian Statistical Institute. 
My thoughts go to Professor Mahalanobis and his long association 
with my father. I remember his enthusiasm, his dedication and perseverance, 
and the unfailing encouragement he got from Mrs. Mahalanobis, Rani-di 
as she was affectionately known. 

Under his far-seeing leadership, this Institute has played an important 
part in the development of modern India. The world of learning has widely 
acclaimed its contril:!utions to theoretical and applied statistics. It has 
produced generations of distinguished statisticians who have helped to 
advance the frontiers of knowledge in statistical inference, design of sample 
surveys and many other areas. 

In the past thirty years or more,.the Institute has also played a significant 
role in planning economic development. It is generally recognized that the 
Second Five Year Plan marks a critical watershed in the evolution of Indian 
planning. In many ways; it was a unique document-a plan for India's 
industrialization with the ultimate objective of attaining self-reliance. It 
argued, quite correctly, that the economy of a country of India's size and 
diversity could not be planned with traditional exports, largely primary 
products and a few traditional industries, such as jute and cotton textiles, 
as the leading sectors. It did not neglect employment generation or the role 
of small industries and agriculture. Mahalanobis and the Indian Statistical 
Institute worked out a two-pronged strategy which is often ignored by its 
foreign and domestic critics. This strategy aimed at the rapid growth of the 

Inaugural speech· at tne golden jubilee celebrations of the Indian Statistical Institute, 
Calcutta, December Z9, 1981 

'machinery' sector along with renewed emphasis on small and cottage 
industries. 

The results are impressive. Today Indian industry is greatly diversified. 
In several vital sectors, we are self-sufficient or nearly so. Our export basket 
includes manufactured items. Our agriculture has overgrown its exclusive · 
reliance on primitive technology. In some regions, we have modernized 
agriculture beyond recognition, a process to which our growing industrial 
capability has made a major contribution. Above all, we have a large and 
growing number of technicians, skilled workers, engineers, doctors and 
teachers in whom any country could take pride. 

However, we cannot say that all this has given the results we desired 
and what our people so desperately need. \Ve have a long way to go to 
provide all our people with the basic necessities of life and to maintain our 
standing as an independent nation. 

Our main problem areas which need concerted attention in the immediate 
future are food, energy and certain infrastructure pr9ducts such· as steel, 
cement, coal and power. 

It is generally admitted that the growth rate of our cereal production 
compares favourably with 'that of most· countries. Our emphasis now should 
be to reduce the magnitude of output fluctuations in bad years. The area 
under irrigation must be increased. Investment in public irrigation is our 
foremost task and has to be executed with vigour. 

As regards edible oils, sugar and cotton, proper planning of the area 
under different crops, varietal improvements and increasing the intensity· 
of land use through multiple cropping have to be emphasised. The Planning 
Commission is looking into the details. 

In energy, we have achieved some success in increasing oil discovery 
and production. But oil has become a most expensive commodity and we 
can ill afford to waste it in any non-essential or unnecessary consumption. 
New sources of energy must be developed• and far greater encouragement 
given to Research and Development because their long-term pay-off is of 
immense value. 

Coal can substitute for oil to some extent. We achieved some increase 
in coal production from 1972 to 1976, but this has not been kept up. The 
question is not merely of our investment but also of proper planning and 
organization. 

In electricity, steel, cement, non-ferrous metals, and other infrastructural 
items, production from installed capacity must be maximised by good 
management and price policy. Capacity has to be expanded to match the 
growing requirements of our economy. The internal resource generation of 
these units has to increase substantially, preferably through greater produc-
In addition, Plan funds need to be 
tion and more efficient operations. 
mobilized and invested. If infrastructure industries work well and railways, 

shipping, ports and communication function better, the entire economy will 
get a forward thrust. 

At the moment we face a large balance of payment's gap which has been 
imposed on us largely by world developments such as recession in advanced 
industrial economies and rise in the prices of oil and many other essential 
products such as steel, machinery, etc. There may have been some laxity 
in the import of goods which are obtainable here but, by and large, we have 
allowed imports only of essential items. Extra production is the key to 
'minimising the import bill. 

Export promotion is another way of closing the payment's gap. Exports 
should be raised concentrating rather on relatively high value items. In a 
large economy; when export constitutes a small fraction of the national 
income, the notion of export-led growth is hardly relevant. During the 
first half of the 1970s, our exports grew at a high rate and there is no doubt. 
that the performance can be repeated and improved. No longer is there 
the _export pessimism of the 1950s .. · Our policies. and plan· strategies have 
enabled us to build a mature enough industrial structure to .compete .inter~ 
nationally and to generate exports in all kitids of manufactured items to 
many countries in Africa, America; Asia and Europe. 

Technology is the base of economic progress. Where we do not have 
it, we must import, always bearing in mind that such imports should lead to 
the growth of indigenous technology. Where necessary, foreign technology 
has to be absorbed and used through our own research and development 
efforts to build our self-reliance. 

Since Independence and from the beginning of our planned development, 
we have regarded increased production as complementary to improved 
distribution of income. A high rate of growth of the gross national product 
by itself does not serve our purpose unless it is more equitably shared, benefit-
ing all sections of the population. To be effective, increased=production with 
better distribution depends h}rgely on our ability to increase the productivity 
of the small roan, whether he is engaged in agriculture or industry. 
In 
agriculture, the most critical inputs are water and credit together with 
cultivable land. Our land reform legislation has aimed at redistributing 
land to small owners. There are sometimes political obstacles; but it is not 
known generally how many cases are pending in courts. We must also ensure 
that small owners have access to other essential inputs. In industry, we have 
encouraged small-scale and cottage industries. Greater availability of power 
along with assured market and credit arrangements can make tremendous 
difference to productivity. 

Given the rate of expansion of our labour force, the generation of a 
much greater rate of employment has assumed critical importance. However, 
it is disastrous to create more jobs by over-staffing enterprises or by depress-
ing the productivity growth in crucially important sectors. That is a temporary 
answer which is bound, in the long run, to aggravate the problem. There 

do exist large areas such as major irrigation works,· numerous important 
construction activities and certain labour intensive industries which provide 
more employment while achieving higher levels of productivity. Irrigation 
is doubly beneficial because it provides far more employment while projects 
are being executed as well as on their completion by raising cropping intensity. 
To succeed in these areas, we must reduce delays, attain proper work norms 
and prevent leakages of essential commodities into unproductive channels. 
. This is the outline of a national consensus, forged in the beginning of 
our planning and developed through our experience of the last 25 or more 
years. It is a pity that sometimes narrow sectional or selfish interests 
challenge this consensus. Planning should rise above regional, sectional or 
narrow . political perspectives. It should view the country as a whole in the 
context of a changing world economy. The options are not many. 

The coming few years will have to be years of consolidation and renewed 
and redoubled hard work. The inflation, unleashed in· the last years of the 
l970s, must be brought under control. The rate of inflation has come down 
·· this year but not yet_ to the extent of providing sufficient relief to the 
consumer. The only enduring method to curb inflation and to raise the 
living standards of our people is economic growth; that means rising output 
and increased productivity. Let us make this coming year a year of pro-
ductivity-when intense and sustained effort is made by all concerned, the 
Central Government and the State Governments, the public sector and the 
private sector, in industry and agriculture, to n1aximise production. AU 
existing capacities must be fully utilized. All the obstacles to the path of 
increased production must be overcome, all -diversionary trends reversed. 
This is not a party programme; but a national programme calling for a 
tremendous, all-out and united endeavour. 

Also, we must practise the utmost economy in our expenditure. In 
today's circumstances, we have to be fully·;prepared. to meet any external 
pressure or threat. This is one demand on· our resources that cannot be 
ignored. At the same time, we must meet the needs of investment and planned 
development. Every effort has to be made to raise resources for all these 
requirements. Reckless expenditure in unproductive activities is bad financial 
management and something which we simply cannot afford when developing 
productive forces should be the primary aim of all economic policy. 

I have great pleasure in inaugurating the golden jubilee celebrations 
of this major centre of advanced learning which is a living monument to the 
vision of a great scientist and has made substantial contribution to our 
development endeavour. 

Co-operatives in National Life 
I AM GLAD to be with you on this occasion to mark the completion of three 
quarters of a century of the service of the co-operative movement. 
Great and selfless men have been connected with this movement. Since 
its modest beginning, it has grown to impressive size; 3.5 lakh societies with 
· a membership of a 100 million is no small achievement. There are different 
forms of co-operatives and not all of them involve or affect their members 
in the same way. In an urban area, a co-operative store is one of many out-
lets open to a citizen to buy his needs; but some producer co-operatives 
may provide the entire livelihood of its members. 

· This complex has been named aftermy father. And Rao Birendra Singh 
has just unveiled his bust. Jawaharlal Nehru was a staunch believer in the 
· co-operative .. movement, To him .it represented not just another form of . 
organizing economic activities, but a whole attitude of participatory citizen-
ship in democracy. In his words, "the whole concept of a national state · 
and national freedom rests on the co-operative endeavour of individuals who 
live in the state to maintain its freedom and achieve its prosperity". He 
strongly believed that co-operatives could mitigate the private sector's greed 
and exploitativeness and the public sector's callousness and bureaucratism. 
That is why he enthusiastically encouraged this 'third sector'. Our Five-Year 
Plans have consistently accorded special importance to co-operatives, 
highlighting their potential in rural regeneration. I need not remind this 
gathering that my father's championship of co-operation earned him 
powerful foes who have not·Jorgiven )lim to this day. 

Although many still believe that profit is a divine right, even ostensibly 
, capitalist nations have a large proportion of economic activity in the State 
or co-operative sector. The role of co-operatives in American and Japanese 
agriculture is well known. The underlying principle of co-operation is faith 
in the human being, in man's capacity to build and to share. In fostering 
co-operatives, we hope that the movement will promote people's organizing 
and administering abilities and serve as a nursery of self-government. That 
is why in our philosophy of democratic government, we have linked co-
operatives with Panchayati Raj institutions. 

Some of the more notable successes of our co-operative movement, 

such as the co-operative dairying, have attracted world-wide notice. 

I would have mentioned our sugar co-operatives also, but in India today, 
sugar is a sour subject. The failures are also many-in fact, far too many. 

Address at the platinum jubilee celebrations or the co-operative movement 
New Delhi, October 1, 1980 

in India, 

An analysis of the successes shows that the seeds were sown by enlighten-
ed, self-effacing personalities who deeply believed in the 
fundamental 
principles of co-operation. Some successes have turned into failures when 
the original impulse has waned and individuals and groups have captured 
institutions to exercise power or utilize their resource;, for their own purposes. 
The failures are more frequent when there is no community involvement and 
when institutions are organized primarily with departmental efforts to fulfil 
targets. The lack of managerial ability of members and the tendency to 
function in cliques and factions have been the principal reasons for our 
co-operatives not working as well as they should. 

Another shortcoming, which my father mentioned nearly 25 years ago 
at a meeting of the National Development Council, is that of the rich taking 
advantage of the movement and obstructing help 
the poor. When 
there is gross mismanagement and when social objectives are not fulfilled, 
the people expect goveniment to correct the situation. Hence the legislation 
to· regulate and intervene in ·. co-operative societies; These provisions . 
. may have some restrictive influences. Your Union has .been pointing out to .· 
the need for . 
the proliferation of laws in regard to co-operatives and 
rationalization. Some work has begun on this and it should be carried 
forward expeditiously by all concerned. 

to 

Co-operatives should be run on modern commercial principles. 
However, they should think not merely of the return to their own members, 
If, for example, the collective 
but of benefit to the entire community. 
efforts of a group. of individuals in a sugar co-operative bring 
them 
prosperity, they must explore ways of seeing how this prosperity can be 
shared 
in a wider sphere, i.e., even with consumers. Co-operative 
organizations should also consider future investments demanded by techno-
logical changes .. :It is because many of our private industrialists have failed 
to do this that we are burdened with sick mills. The prospect of 
successful co-operatives which have turned themselves into grass commercial 
enterprises is a depressing one. At the same time, many co-.operatives 
established schools and colleges which have benefited the larger community. 
Co-operatives should become disseminators of managerial and technological 
talent. 

This is where education and training are invaluable. The National 

Co-operative Union and other similar institutions should have a well-
designed, outgoing programme to spread the ideals of the movement, and 
emphasis should be on practice rather than precept. People must be exposed 
to the enormous benefits that can flow to an area 
from co-operative 
endeavour. Every co-operative society which does good work should be 
encouraged and 
its efforts publicized. Leaders of the co-operative 
movement should be trained not to be static or power-centred. They must 
make a conscious effort to involve the weaker sections. Like the dispersal 
of technology and organizational skill, continuous transfer of power should 

be the aim of the co-operative movement. Only then can it survive and thrive 
and justify itself. 

So far, I have spoken of the problems of the co-operative movement. 
In reality, there is need for the co-operative spirit ·in the whole of national 
life. There are countries like Tanzania which are trying to build their entire 
political edifice on th() co-operative philosophy. Our own political system 
is built around competition among parties. While political parties should 
certainly be free to propound alternative policies and the people should be 
free to choose among them, there must be agreement among parties to work 
the system. Without this basic willingness to co-operate, parliamentary 
democracy will become unworkable. Many of our political troubles have 
arisen precisely because some parties or groups of persons have tried to take 
advantage of the freedom provided by the system, in order to gain their own 
objectiv~, regardless of the rights of others or of the vast majority of the· 
people of our country. 

Iil the pasffew months, many-kinds of inter-group tensions have broken 

out in different parts. Communal trouble which had gradually subsided ·· 
over the years has erupted again. This time we find that it does seem to be 
the handiwork of well-organized, fanatical groups than any mass 
more 
frenzy. Our task is to fight such tendencies and convince people who talk 
in communal or casteist terms of the error of their ways. 

Yet another poison that is being assiduously spread is the 'sons of the 
soil' theory-as though people born in another part of Indian soil are not 
equally sons and daughters of Mother India. These narrow doctrines can 
be checked only by the united will and united action of right-thinking people. 
In this task I seek the co-operation of co-operators. 
I sincerely hope that 
within the co-operative movement; caste or communal or regional feelings 
·or institutions will not be encouraged. 
Just as we need the co-operative spirit within our country, so is it 
It is when people think only of chauvinistic 
essential in international affairs. 
nationalism that most of the troubles in the world arise. We have today 
the knowledge and the ability to solve the problems of poverty, economic 
backwardness, unemployment and so on. There is need for a co-operative 
endeavour on the part of all nations, big and small. The problems have 
been identified. The remedies are known, but somehow we lack the will 
to start acting positively. The co-operative spirit should extend to all spheres 
of life. 

I have pleasure in inaugurating the platinum jubilee celebrations of the 
co-operative movement in our country and in declaring open the Jawaharlal 
Nehru National Co-operative Complex. 
I give you all my greetings and 
good wishes. 

WILDLIFE 

As IN PREV10US years, starting from today we celebrate the Wildlife Week. 
The fact that this coincides with Gandhi Jayanti has special significance 
because Mahatma Gandhi stood for tolerance and love for all living beings. 
It is appropriate that on his birth anniversary every year, attention should be 
focussed on man's duty and responsibility towards other forms of life, 
specially the flora and fauna in the natural .state, generally known as 
'wildlife'. 

Most people do not realize the value of wildlife for human existence. 
Man survives as part of the biosphere which is made up of different 
communities of living organisms-plants, animals, human beings. Every 
thing in the world is inter-related and all are mutually dependant. By 
protecting wildlife we express our concern for all life and thus for our own. 
The Government attaches high importance . to the · preservation of . 
wildlife and the education of the public in this regai:d. As chairman of the 
Indian Board for Wildlife, I urge all people to co-operate with our efforts. 

WILDLIFE-2 

IN tTs UNENDING struggle for survival; the human species sharpened its 
mental and phydcal endowments and became master of the Earth. Man's 
achievements have been truly remarkable. But somewhere along 
the 
journey he forgot that he is only one link in the chain of existence and that 
without other links he may not be able to survive. 

We humans are dependant on the animal and the vegetable kingdoms 
and these, although blessed-with incredible vitality, cannot prosper without 
our consideration and co-operation. Through our indir1'erence and self-
centredness, we have already caused severe stress to the natural order. 
The responsibility on the present generation is an onerous one. 

Let us give back to Nature what we have taken from it-creativity 
and capacity for renewal. Wildlife Week is only a short step towards a 
distant destination. When it comes again next year, I hope we shall be in a 
position to claim that our animal friends are more secure and their 
environment more congenial than a year ago. 

Message for t.lie Wildlife Week, New Delhi, October 1, 1980 
Message for the Wildlife Week, New Delhi, September 20, 1981 

Agriculture: Self-reliance and Interdependence 
THE HUNGRY OF the world owe much to Frank McDougall who was one 
It is a privilege 
of those responsible for setting up this great Organization. 
to deliver this lecture in his honour; specially in the presence of so many 
distinguished persons directly concerned with the planning and execution 
of agricultural programmes 
the world. Frank 
McDougall was deeply conscious of global interdependence in agriculture. 
He lit the lamp and we have to guard the flame. 
like to 
congratulate the Director-General, Dr Edouard Saouma, on his re-election. 
We wish him success in his efforts for world food security. 

in various parts of 

I should also 

Life and food are inseparable. As a hymn from India's ancient books 

of wisdom, th~ Upanishads; put it:· · 

From food are born all creatures that live on eirth; afterwards they· 
live on food and when they die they return to food. 

The search for food is the foundation of all other quests. The wish for 
plenty-whether from hunt, catch or harvest-is easily mankind's oldest 
collective thought. 

The earliest civilizations arose when hunter turned into farmer. 
Agriculture cradled culture. 
In my own country there are areas which have 
been under the plough continuously for several thousand years. By a 
strange quirk of fate these very lands where agriculture developed early, 
now experience shortages of food and are even derisively referred to as 
basket cases. 

One of our national songs describes India as a well-watered land, rich 
in fruit and dark-green with plant . and foliage. History tells us how 
frequently it was subjected to famine. There is a record of a twelve-year 
fa1nine in Magadha not long after Alexander's expedition in the third century 
In spite of my country's fabled riches, through the centuries, large 
numbers have known hunger. Foreign rule, with the outflow of resources, 
aggravated it. Mahatma Gandhi once said that to the poor, God can only 
appear in the form of bread. For me and many of my contemporaries, 
the final memory of foreign rule in India is the Great Bengal Famine in the 
-early 1940s in which three million or more were allowed to die. We vowed 
never again to let this happen. 

The Frank McDougall Memorial Lecture delivered at the twenty-first session of the FAO, 
Rome, November 9, 19131 

· Free India can legitimately claim that in spite of many severe droughts, 
starvation has been prevented. To keep this promise, we imported grain 
for many years. When I became Prime Minister in 1966, we were in the 
midst of drought and famine conditions. We cannot control the monsoon, 
but I determined that we should be better prepared to meet any such future 
calamity. 
I remember vividly tracking the movement of every ship and 
train to know that food was actually reaching where most needed. This 
experience urged us to give the top-most priority to self~sufficiency in food. 
In the early seventies, just when experts forecast irredeemable deficits, at last 
we became self-sufficient in grain. Apart from taking care of the normal 
grain requirement of 14 per cent of the world's population, in 1979-80 India 
could overcome the century's worst drought which affected 38 million 
hectares of farmland and more than 220 million people in eleven major 
States. · We have also been able to help son1e neighbours. 

Since the mid-seventies we have had fairly 

large buffer stocks. But 
there is no room for complacency. Our self-sufficiency might not survive 
a series of droughts .. · But that it was achieved at all is a. tribute to our . · 
· national will and the good sense and hard \vork of the Indian farmer and 
his readiness to take help from science and the administration. 

A combination of factors has contributed to the doubling or near· 
trebling of grain output-Jawaharlal Nehru's priority to agriculture in his 
planning strategy, h.is emphasis on an infrastructure of irrigation; power, 
scientific research, extension service, tenancy reforms which gave land 
rights to 1nillions and the networks of credit and marketing. 

Food self-sufficiency was attained largely by mobilizing big and medium 
farmers. We were aware that the Green Revolution, as it has been called, 
exacerbated some problems in rural areas, especially the clisparities between 
large and small farmers and tensions between landowners and labourers. 
But at that time our paramount objective was 
to be free of imports. 
Simultaneously, we drew up special programmes for small· farmer_s to 
cunsolidate their gains in production by extending inputs to them and making 
their occupation viable. 
the 
significant fact that farm productivity is, by and large, neutral to the size of 
the farm. This is· great news to all over-populated agro-based developing 
countries. We are also devising programmes of alternative employment to 
the landless. Our family planning campaign is another essential element 
for food self-sufficiency as well as for general enhancement of living 
standards. A fact which 
is not easily understood in Europe is that 
illiteracy did not come in the way of our farmers taking advantage of new 
knowledge. They have had a long tradition of learning from seeing and 
hearing. 

Indian experience has also discovered 

Many were the critics within India and elsewhere who decried our 
strategy of development and accused us pf advancing industry at the cost 
of agriculture. Agricultural development cannot be conceived in isolation 

from industrial development or of economic development in its totality. 
For the supply of inputs and the demand for outputs, agriculture depends 
on industry. The growth of agricultural productivity is conditioned by 
employment oppo_rtunities elsewhere, by the supply of non-land inputs at 
increasingly cheaper rates and the absorption of outputs at remunerative 
In an attempt to quicken the pace of development, some countries 
prices. 
diverted agricultural savings or surpluses to industry. This did help 
to augment industrial development significantly but kept down investment 
in agriculture. 
In India, where the majority of people live on agriculture, 
progressively higher investment must be made to increase agricultural output 
and productivity over a period. This is our policy, as can be demonstrated 
by the rates of agricultural investmert in different Plan periods. The idea 
. that agricultural development can be sustained by neglecting industrializa-
tion is equally erroneous. The two sectors are inter-dependant and the 
growth of the one is integrally linked with that of the other. 

We, who follow Jaw_aharlal Nehru) strategy, are_ concentrating on 
building secure foundations of self-reliance. Currentlyi our emphasis is 
on : 

(i) Implementing schemes to lessen poverty, especially in backward 
areas and among the weakest sections of the population by 
development of the rural areas; generating employment and 
purchasing power; and transferring the productive assets of land 
and livestock to them. 

(ii) Promoting agricultural research which is suited to local conditions, 
and taking its benefits to the field through 'Lab to Land' and other 
programmes. 

(iii) Increasing agricultural production in all its aspects by enlarging 
the area under irrigation; more inputs, particularly credit; 
remunerative prices to farmers; and facilities for marketing, 
storage; processing and transportation. 

(iv) A food management programme which involves adequate buffer 
stocks, proper storage, and an extensive public distribution system 
to make foodgrains available at assured prices to consumers 
all over the country. 

We have long been aware of the relation between land reform and rural 
development. The old feudal order and colonial rule arrested social 
evolution, denying us many decades of progress. Soon after Independence, 
land reform became an area of priority. 
In the past, land ownership 
and tenurial rigbts were weighted against the poor and the weak. 
It has been an uphill task to bring about the desired shifts in the 
ownership of land and livestock from. the richer to the poorer sections. 
While not satisfactory, we have made significant progress in most parts, 

THE ECONOMiC SCENE 

enforcing ceilings on land ownership and conferring security of tenure. 
Above all, we have succeeded in changing the old psychology of looking upon 
land as a status symbol and source of security rather than as an important 
means of production. Based on the land-man ratio, a uniform pattern of 
ceilings on land holdings, as low as between 50 and 80 acres per family, 
has been introduced and is in the process of implementation. These laws 
are being obeyed, not only administratively, but in the sense that the landlord 
community is reconciling itself to it. We are determined to complete this 
process and the distribution of surplus land soon. One of our States, 
the Punjab, which now has some of the most notable productivity levels in 
the world, was able to make a rapid progress after the introduction of new 
varieties of wheat and rice from 1967 onwards, mainly because it was 
endowed with three major basic prerequisites for the rapid adoption and 
diffusion of new technology : owner cultivation, rural communication and 
rural electrification. 

Rural economy can be made more efficient by decentralizing production . · 
and by supporting marketjng with centralized services in key areas. Our . 
co-operative dairy movement, which began in Gujarat, and has now spread 
to other pai:ts is an example of the high potential of human· resources. 
Under the National Dairy Programme known as 'Operation Flood' which 
was launched in 1970, the number of village milk producers co-operatives in 
India has risen from 1,500 to 12,000. Altogether some 1.6 million rural 
milk producers and their families participate. Recent studies show that 
n1ore than half of these beneficiaries are landless labourers and marginal 
farmers who have less than two hectares of land. For these poor people 
in particular, milk earning~ are vital. Helped by their co-operatives, landless 
families can double their incomes by increased production and sale of milk. 
Moreover, milk brings daily income and is often collected directly by the 
women who actually tend the milch animals. This programme is now 
being expanded to cover 10 million fai:ming families during the next five 
years. We are_grateful to PAO and the World Food Programme for their 
support to this project, and h9pe to have similar co-operative organizations 
in horticulture, aquaculture and agro-forestry. The collective strength of 
small farmers and fisherfolk will help them to mobilize more inputs and take 
bigger risks. 

I have referred at some length to the Indian experience because I know 
it and to make the point that if a nation of 683 million can manage to feed 
itself, the challenge of hunger cannot be insurmountable. 
I do realize our 
shortcomings and how much more we have yet to do. Many problems 
remain-the challenge of disparities, the plight of the landless and the under-
employed, the need for a more nutritious diet, and new and energy-conserving 
methods of food production. The higher production levels of the last few 
years have been achieved because of liberal inputs of energy. Agriculture, 
not only in India but everywhere, even in advanced countries, must learn 

to produce more with lesser inputs of energy, fertilizer or fuel-using farm 
machinery. 

· Viewing world agriculture, we find a shrinkage of food production over 
the last decade. This, with the rise in population ~nd the levels of inflation 
in most countries, causes anxiety. The absolute number of underfed people 
is not diminishing fast enough. 
Indeed there are signs that it might be 
going up. And this at a time when the world as a whole has the knowledge, 
the technological means and the funds to eradicate want! Obviously, our 
political and other institutions have not kept pace with capacities and 
expectations. Many individual nations also lack the means. That is the 
urgency of interdependence. 

There has been interdependence through the centuries. The plants 
and genetic material of one country have travelled to or been consciously 
introduced in others. There are stimulating controversies as to which fruit 
or tree was imported from which country or continent, · The latest example 
of this widespread trans-continental exchange is found in the agricuitural 
research centres in Jndia where hundreds of samples .ofseed of paddy, wheat, .· 
· cotton, groundnut, etc., from far off countries are being used to develop 
local strains giving them the characteristics and resistances required under 
local conditions. The quest continues unabated wherein the most crucial 
input comes from the progressive · farmers, big and small. 

There has been trade in produce. In the colonial era, interdependence 
took the form of the transfer of agricultural produce in large quantities and 
at low prices from the colonies to metropolitan countries. The emphasis 
was on the cultivation of agricultural raw materials necessary to feed the 
industries of coloµial powers. Cotton; oilseeds; indigo (in earlier days) 
and plantation crops like coffee, tea, cocoa, rubber and spices were 
encouraged for their use. In the post-colonial era, producing countries have 
not been able to entirely change this pattern of dependence on marketing 
avenues. When crops ate good,.international prices fall. When crops are 
poor, the market is so manipulated that profits go to traders and middlemen, 
bypassing the producer. The share in world 
trade of weaker nations, 
particularly those with single-crop economies, is dwindling. 

The incapacity to organize international trade in agricultural commodi-

ties which can sustain production and consumption everywhere, is true of 
plantation and industrial crops; and also of foodgrains. The adoption of 
a new International Wheat Trade Agreement designed to guarantee the 
stability of the market and the availability of supplies has been thwarted. 
The world's major producers are unwilling to give up the advantages of 
so-called free market forces and the opportunity to use food as a political 
weapon. High prices are charged for essential agricultural inputs such as 
fertilizers and pesticides, taking them beyond the grasp of those who need 
them most; Discriminatory 
industrial 
countries is as high as 700 per cent for a number of processed agricultural 

agricultural protectionism 

in 

THE ECONOM~C SCENE 

that a 50 per cent 
products. An UNCTAD study of 46 items shows 
liberalization could help developing countries to achieve trade expansion of 
$3 billion or an increase of 35 per cent over the 1977 value of these exports. 
The committed targets of 10 million tonnes under the Food Aid 
Convention and of 500,000 tonnes under the International Emergency Food 
Reserve-themselves low compared to a minimum computed requirement of 
twice those figures--are yet to be fulfilled despite repeated exhortations in 
all relevant United Nations bodies. However, I am glad that.the resources 
needed by the International Fund for Agricultural Development for its 
1981-83 programme of work are in sight, and that the International 
Monetary Fund has established a 'food facility' to allow compensatory 
drawings by countries with balance of payments difficulties because of the 
extra cost of food imports. This will give at least some relief to those 
developing countries which have periodical crop failures. Such gestures of 
assistance deserve appreciation,. but the more important internati9nal 
programmes still do not have the needed support The poor response to the 
plea of the World. Food Programme for a contribution of one billion dollars. 
· · for the 1980~82 period, the failure to meet the O.Tper cent of GNP target for 
development· assistance, and the continuing delay to evolve a new Wheat 
Trade Agreement are all indices of reluctance to come to grips with some of 
the basic elements of global food security. 

These trends make it imperative for developing countries to pursue the 
policy of collective self-reliance, especially in food security with the maximu,11 
determination and vigour. 
In the short run and in crisis situations, external 
assistance from affluent countries does help. But the increase of external 
investment or concessional financial facilities alone cannot be a 
lasting 
ren1edy for the ills of the developing world. Developing countries must do 
their utmost to attain self-sufficiency within the shortest possible time. 

The growing awareness of the ecological interdependence of countries 
and the deepening energy problem will probably be the ultimate cementing 
factors in bringing the One World concept closer to reality. Experts believe 
that the steady increase of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere because of large 
amounts of fossil fuels being burnt may lead to changes of temperature early 
in the next century. Although the precise impact of such changes cannot 
yet be predicted, many experts feel that they may harm some of the highly 
productive farming regions of the Northern latitudes. This clearly indicates 
that on considerations of ecological security too, the edifice of effective food . 
security needs to be global, encompassing the South and the North. 

The productive capacity of land and water can be improved by man's 
action. Several rivers of sorrow can be converted into streams of wealth 
by co-operation among countries sharing international rivers. The genetic 
resou1ces of plants and animals constitute a common heritage and deserve 
to be conserved and utilised in a co-operative manner. The march of deserts 
and the destruction of the biological potential and of land can be arrested-

in many cases through regional and international co-.operation. Warnings 
through global and regional weather watch arrangements help minimize 
damage to crops by weather · fluctuations. Pests and pathogens do not 
respect political boundaries. Through co-ordinated action organized under 
the auspices of FAO, we have curbed locust invasions. 

I believe that the equitable distribution of our conventional stocks of 
fenergy and the joint development of new and renewable sources test the 
- enlightened will of nations to survive in .comfort, harmony and dignity. 
!" Several countries which export oil have 'liquid gold' under sterile sand. 
In 
1979, six oil-rich countries in West Asia alone imported about 6 million tonnes 
of cereals valued at about $1.6 billion. Even this money goes to affluent 
countries. Meaningful co-operation between developing countries with 
untapped agricultural production potentials and oil-rich countries with 
surplus financial resources but with deficit food budget could ·make. an 
enormous difference. 

· Agriculture is the most important source. of.renewable wealth. 

\Yhere 
.. there is n:o shortage of land, biomass programmes can solve· many energy 
India cannot afford diversion of land to produce alcohol when 
. problems. 
a growing population (has to ·be adequately fed. However, 
through 
intelligent and carefully · planned social 
forestry programmes, we can 
produce the fuel, fodder and fertilizer for rural areas. For small farmers, 
the cultivation of horticultural crops is a desirable form of land use and 
improves nutrition and income. Deficiencies in post-harvest technology, 
however, deny the poor cultivator proper returns from production. Social 
forestry and horticulture on every bit of vacant land is one way of harvesting 
considerable quantities of solar energy. This will be 
the real Green 
Revolution. 

Every country should give greater attention to the preservation of 
forests. A 5000-year old Indus Valley seal depicts two thoughtless men 
pulling out two trees by their roots. From the centre springs a figure, the 
spirit of the trees who, with outstretched arms, demands an ending to this 
destruction. We have a contemporary version of local women putting their 
arms around trees to prevent felling. There is an old adage in Kashmir 
that food will last so long as forests do ("Ann poshi tele yeli poshi van"-
Sheikh Nur-ud-Din Wali). The close relationship between food production 
and forestry is well known but generally ignored in practice. The presence 
of industrialization, urbanization and the growing demand for agricultural 
products is causing reckless deforestation in many regions. Forest products 
for bonafi.de use, including timber for local housing, are becoming ever 
more inaccessible to the rural poor. The real energy crisis facing millions 
in developing countries is the scarcity of fuelwood. Scientific management 
of forest resources, with special care for watersheds and wildlife, 
will help the voiceless millions, and also ensure long-term _national 
welfare. 

The introduction of technologies without adequate understanding of 
their impact on employment and other social consequences leads to distress. 
People, more particularly rural women, are displaced 
traditional 
occupations. Millions of our women earn their living through operations 
like selling fruits and vegetables, processing farm produce and drying and 
storing grains. They also usually look after the entire area of energy 
management based on the collection and utilization of agricultural and 
animal wastes and post-harvest technology. They are harmed by the 
imitation of energy-intensive and labour displacing 
techniques which 
developed nations have introduced in post-harvest technology which also 
make greater demands on energy. 

Wherever it is beneficial, the latest technology should be adopted. 
There are many a1 eas where technology and human labour do not compete 
for jobs-satellite photography for resource mapping, climate prediction, 
also serial seeding of forestry species in .desert and hill areas. Techniques 
of capture and culture fisheries in inland waters and in the oceans can be. 
improved .. · Modern systems of soil, plant and animal health care must be . 
developed. The 
latest · techniques of communication are essential. 
Computers to develop climate models will assist us in the introduction of 
alternative cropping strategies, contingency plans and compensatory 
production programmes in order to reduce the adverse impact of aberrant 
weather. Recent advances in genetic engineering and bio-technology are 
useful for a wide variety of purposes in agriculture, animal husbandry; 
fisheries and forestry. These and many other :fields provide us opportunities 
to achieve quantum jumps in technological progress. 

However, the latest technology in a developed country may not be best 
suited for a developing one. The needs of the country should determine the 
technology, and from this standpoint -a whole _vista of independent and 
original development of technologies opens up. Another important factor 
to be borne in mind is that developing countries cannot afford the often 
wasteful luxury of switching technologies too often; without giving a fair 
trial to any of them. 

The absorption of technology is a matter not merely of calculating costs 
and benefits, prices of technology, costs of labour displaced or revenues of 
product achieved. Technology has an impact on society-the mode of living 
and the relationship between people and institutions. Technological change 
cannot be abruptly imposed. 
It has to be a process of evolution. However 
modern, however beneficial a technology, it has to fit in with indigenous 
culture and capabilities and harmoniously 
tradition into 
modernity. 

transform 

Planning for agricultural advance must necessarily be indigenous though 
guided by the global perspective. The starting point is the preparation of 
reliable and compact agricultural balance-sheets using modern techniques 
of resource surveys which are based on remote sensing and aerial mapping. 

Champions of appropriate technology would sometimes like developing 
countries to confine themselves to obsolete technology. Obsolescence is as 
undesirable in developing nations as in developed ones. 
A national food security system cannot wait 

to be led by any 

international body, A country's citizens are the responsibility of the govern-
ment that claims their allegiance. Governments of the developing world 
have borne burdens unknown to the administrators of affluent societies. 
Much of the disparity and exploitation against which we struggle in the 
international sphere mocks us at home. There can be no enduring solution 
to hunger without ending social and economic inequality, but our efforts are 
hampered by other competing values set by affluent societies which had not 
thought of or practised them in their own struggling period. The paucity 
of food supplies is in real terms only a part of immediate problems, albeit a 
major threat to the future. Many ofus are growing the food that we need 
but, have not been able to reach it to every mouth. For a permanent 
impact, national° food security must have an umbrella of social security. 

The food security larder requires more than the periodic _generosity of 
the rich. · Hunger has¥to be tackled through conscious institutional reform 
within nations and between nations, and not just by overhauling technology 
or supplementing the supply of food. Technology is not a total answer nor 
will a change in it automatically change institutions. An effective world 
food security system must eliminate the institutional whims and vagaries 
that create artificial scarcity. They must ensure buffer stocks for unforeseen 
and unavoidable emergencies. We have very little positive control over 
nature, but let us not be subordinated by our institutions. 

The world has the technological capability and the financial resources 
necessary to eliminate hunger and malnutrition by the end of this decade. 
Only three per cent of: the current world cereal production is enough to 
eliminate hunger immediately. Yet we find the Freedom From Hunger 
initiative of its distinguished past 
Campaign launched by FAO at the 
Director-General, Dr B. R. Sen, receiving little attention or support. The 
entire world faces a monumental challenge to fight malnutrition and hunger 
in this matter of food security. 

So far we have spoken of national and international initiatives to 
produce more food and improve distribution. Hungry or satiate, we are 
shadowed by a greater devastation-the awesome arsenals of nuclear and 
other weapons. Do we struggle against the desperation of hunger only to 
see the world blown asunder?. Do we preserve the human body in health and 
vitality only to sacrifice it on the altar of war? Hunger is generally the most 
common cause of violence in animals or humans. Wars have been fought 
the hungry are not 
for food, for territory, for honour. But, ironically, 
belligerent today, it is those who have plenty. 

Eminent economists say that if the present daily world expenditure of 
about $1.3 billion were frozen even at this level, the money to eliminate 

hunger could easily be found. The expenditure incurred on a new inter-
continental missile could plant 200 million 
irrigate one million 
hectares, feed 50 million malnourished children in developing countries, buy 
a million tonnes of fertilizers, erect a million small bicigas plants, build 
65;000 health care centres or have 340,000 primary schools. The strategic 
Hunger Elimination Treaty which President Kenneth Kaunda advocated 
in an earlier lecture in this series, coupled with progressive disarmament, 
is a worthwhile programme. 

trees, 

· It was with the use of the plough that the hu1nan species first became 
touched it with 

conscious of the earth as the bountiful mother and 
sanctity. 

The earth has been ravaged, desecrated, made sterile-perhaps through 
ignorance in the initial stages but lately driven by greed and arrogance. 
Today, it is not the ignorant but the knowing who pose the main danger to 
humankind's survival. Knowledge no longer leads to the realization of 
· Truth. There is little visible pain at misery or violence. We talk of a crisis 
in the hu1nan environh1eiJ.t, consciousness, and values; but we do not 
see it as a breakdown and confusion in a complex pattern of relationships.· 
Recognition that human actions determine the future of the raw material 
of life must awaken us to our responsibilities. Through education we must 
re-establish the sacred dimension that views the resources of the world-the 
air and space, the earth, water, plants, animals-as a common heritage to 
nurture and use frugally. Life can survive only through deep awareness 
of the globe as one and a sharing of the earth's riches in haimony, without 
unsettling the equilibrium or disturbing natural laws. 

The prosperity of any single country is linked with that of the rest of the 
world. Such interdependence between free nations, of benefit to all, 
presupp~es the self-reliance of every nation as well as the recognition that 
the small and the weak also can and should contribute to the comm.on 
cause. A beautiful parable narrated by our po®t Rabindranath Tagore 
comes to my mind : 

"Who among you will take up the duty of feeding the hungry?" Lord 
Buddha asked his followers when famine raged at Shravasti. 
Ratnakar, the banker, hung his head and said, "Much more is needed 
than all my wealth to feed the hungry." 
Jayasen, the chief of the King's army, said, "I would gladly give my 
life's blood, but there is not enough food in my house." 
Dharmapal who owned broad acres of land said with a sigh, "The 
drought demon has sucked my fields dry. 
I know not how to pay 
king's dues." 
Then rose Supriya, the mendicant's daughter. She bowed to all and 
meekly said, "I will feed the hungry." 

t t t 

"How!" they cried in surprise. "How can you hope to .fulfil that 
vow?" 
"I am the poorest of you all", said Sul?riya, "that is my strength. 
have my coffer and my store at each of your houses." 

Forests and National Welfare 
I AM GLAD to be with you on this occasion. Trees have been important 
in my life :.ince my earliest childhood. Almost as soon as I could walk, I 
, was climbing trees, hiding in their branches when I wanted to escape the 

grown-ups, and later as a refuge for study and reading. 
· How cool trees look in the heat and how essential is their shade for us! 
Few sights are more beautiful than trees whether in flowef or with their 
branches laden with fruit or just the countless variety in shape and colour 
of leaf and of the tree itself. Trees are amongst man's most reliable friends 
and a country which cares for its future must take good care of its forests. 

Time was when Mussoorie was known as 'Queen of the Hills'. Dehra 
Dun blossomed and shared in her glory. She has now been robbed of her 
garment. Her climate has changed, her beauty has gone. It is indeed sad 
how our hillsides in all parts of India are becoming bare and brown. 
In the 
South, the Nilgiris got their name because of their rich tropical forests deep 
blue-green in colour. But, little by little and specially during the Second 
World War and after, the hills were denuded of their tree cover. 

This is happening also on our Himalayan slopes. The contractors' 
axe and human greed are destroying our forests, causing great ecological 
damage, erosion and floods and depr-iving many of their traditional liveli-
hood. Europe is much more industrialized than we. Yet most, if not all, 
major cities there have forests either within the city or close by. Fortunately, 
of late, there has been some reawakening· of popular interest in and 
recognition of the vital importance of forests. A new breeze is blowing 
amongst forestry professionals. Experts have introduced new concepts 
like high-yielding forestry, intensive management of production forests, 
conservation of national eco-systems, urban forestry, photo-interpretation, 
the mapping of forest resources, logging training, wildlife management and 
so on. 

Specialization is inescapable in our age of advanced technology, but how 
can it yield the desired results unless it fits into the overall social situation 

Speech at the centenary celebrations of the forest education in India, Dehra Dun, 
December 19, 1981 

in our country? Our forests can survive only if forestry is attuned to the 
goals of national development, and long-term ecological welfare as well as 
that of the communities which live nearby. 

New insights and a sense of urgency combined with responsibility must 
be infused in our forestry policy and education. Ecological conservation 
can become a reality when the people's needs for fuel and employment are 
satisfactorily met. As the frontiers of forestry are enlarging, foresters must 
come out of their self-imposed boundaries of reserve forests and think of . 
wood lots, social forestry and other techniques to involve the community 
itself. 

We must ensure that social forestry does not replace valuable old 
I see no con.flict between the two. New forests should be planted 
forests. 
and, where there is space in old forests, different types of new trees can be 
put in. The development of agriculture and industry and the high growth 
of population continue to reduce our per capita forest area. This has a 
spiral effect on forest resources. Forests ·are a traditional renewable .and. 
cheap·source of energy for rural people. The skyrocketing iucrease in the 
price of petroleum products has led to a greater onslaught on our forests .. 
Rural people want wood for domestic energy and manufacturers want it for 
industries like paper, pulp, plywood, safety matches, sports goods, etc. But 
the simultaneous increase in demand for food crops, fodder crops, cash crops 
like jute and cotton, and plantation crops like rubber, tea and coffee along 
with inroads made by hydroelectric works, townships, railways, roadways, 
canals, power transmission lines, mines etc., make it extremely difficult to 
extend the forest area. But some balance must be found by weighing the 
relative importance of programmes. 

Production must be au~mented by improving productivity and by using 
science to solve the problems created by development. To achieve this, 
some measures, which come to mind, are the selection of the right species to 
suit planting sites, the creation of seed stands, selectio11 of seed trees and 
improvement of nursery practices, better plantation techniques, the applica-
tion of manure and fertilizers arid careful tending of young seedlings backed 
by scientific management practices. For higher productivity, education in 
forestry should take into account these and other related factors. 

A short-term programme which might help 

immediate higher 
production at the cost of long-term benefits and might affect soil and 
environment, cannot be judged as productive. However well qualified he 
may be; the forester alone cannot give the care that forests need. He must 
have the close co-operation of the administration in general and of the 
people. Hence, education for forestry must include people's educatio". 

The Science Advisory Committee of the Cabinet is also looking into 
such matters. Careful selection of human material is of the utmost 
itnportance. We need people who are dedicated and who think of forestry 
not merely as a career. Of course, those who are working must feel satisfied 

with their conditions but in this matter, I am sorry to say, it is not the Prime 
It is sad that there 
Minister who has the last word but the Finance Minister. 
is such a high ~ate of depletion of direct recruits and a tendency to treat this 
service as less than some others. Apart from the fact that every task is 
important, there is something special about trees and closeness to Nature. 
Surely, there do exist young men and women who would respond to the 
call of this profession which is 
interesting as well as emotionally and 
aesthetically fulfilling. We should be able to recruit bright young men and 
women into forestry. So far, very few women have been drawn to it. 
Perhaps there is a mistaken belief that it is a man's job. But all over the 
world women are taking on more and more such jobs in all fields of activity. 
I wish more women would feel interested in forestry, particularly in social 
forestry, because it involves direct interaction with village womenfolk. 

Educational policy should introduce greater specialization in some areas 
after good grounding in the multi-disciplinary aspects of forestry. Advanced 
specialists should also be naturalists who can be competent i:o advise on 
· subjects such as rain, forests,. plant genetics, entomb logy, forest engineering, . 
wet lands, breeding of different species of animals, etc. Only too often, 
specialized work on different species of fauna or flora is left to gifted 
amateurs or to foresters who retain extra-professional interest or to tenacious 
pioneers. With our reserves of talented manpower, we should be in a 
position to depute specialists to organizations like the International Union 
of Conservation of Nature rather than to get experts from them. 

Forestry as a whole will gain with more exposure to forestry in 
universities. Forest colleges should open their doors to students from all 
disciplines. The problems of our people, particularly of tribals living in 
forests or villages adjacent to sanctuaries, should be treated sympathetically 
in the Forest Research Institute and other foi;est colleges. 

Forests are traditional &ources of food, herbs, fuel and other 
essentials of many unsophisticated people who have lived for generations 
in and off the forests. These people are now bewildered and disturbed by 
the shrinking of the forest area, the depletion of produce and numerous 
restrictions imposed by officials. The education of the forester and his 
colleagues in forest sciences should cover the sociology and economics of 
such communities. Forestry practices should make the 
lives of forest 
dwellers, whether humans or other species, happier, not worse. These 
people should not be driven away from forests. Rather we should be able 
to take their help to work and preserve forests scientifically. 

Just as it is realized that exploitation of people must end, so must we 
now recognize that the exploitation of Nature and specially of forests must 
end. We must evolve programmes by which forests can not only co-exist 
but be enlarged side by side with the growth of agricult~re and industry, 
and the three together should help our people to raise their standards of 
living. 

I congratulate the Institute on its centenary and I am glad to be with 
you here and to inaugurate the centenary celebrations as well as to release 
the book that has been brought out. To you all who are working in 
the Institute or studying or are interested in its work, I give my very good 
wishes for now and for future years. 

Oil and Energy 

in our march towards 
THIS FUNCTION MARKS a major su:p forward 
national self-reliance in a field of vital economic and strategic importance, 
i.e., oil technology. The third and fourth India-built offshore platforms 
are ready for flow-down and installation at Bombay High. 
I visited Mazagon Pock about twelve yea1;s ago to 

launch the first 

. ·. frigate built here, the 1.NS. Nilgiri . . Since the1t, these docks have achieved · 

greater expertise in the building of warships and · have also gone into the 
important area of manufacturing offshore platforms for oil production. 
\Vith its experience in the ship-building industry, it is an appropriate agency 
to take up this work and the progress is noteworthy. 

Oil is in the news. Around it revolves the fate of nations. 

If bread is 
the staff of life, oil is the staff of modern industry. 
International affairs are 
closely linked with it. The consumption of oil and its products is increasing 
in our agriculture and our industry as we grow. We hardly use it for cars. 
In fact, our total per capita use is among the very lo·west in the world, lower 
than Pakistan or Sri Lanka. 

Oil supply plays a major role in a country's economic well-being and 
defence-preparedness. Obviously, the highest priority should he given to 
the research for oil within the country (including the offshore area) and to 
oil exploitation with the help of machines of our own manufacture. We 
are still heavily dependant on imports. Oil prices have risen dizzily in recent 
years. The import bill is mounting day by day. This is a great drain on 
our foreign exchange resources. 

It is obvious that this situation calls for a policy which attaches the 
highest priority, :firstly, to the increase of indigenous production; secondly, 
to greater self-reliance in the matter of know-how and production of 
equipment and, thirdly, to greater restraint in the consumption of petroleum 
products. 

Speech at the function held at MazagonDock, Bombay, to hand over the offshore platforms 
built by the Dock for the Oil & Natural Gas Commission, October 11, 1980 

The scientists of ONGC are probing new oil wells. Our. offshore finds 
I am sure that this 

have greatly changed the nation's economic outlook. 
search will continue. 

Until receutly, the eritl.re·,requirements of the Oil & Natural Gas 
Commission for offshore platforms and other offshore structures were 
imported. Our indigenous production and the supply of oil has to be 
safegua1ded in times of peace, 
tension or war. Hence, it is essential to 
enlarge the manufacture of equipment. 

The first two platforms were fabricated by Mazagon Dock with technical 
assistance by a French firm, but the third and subsequent platforms have 
been manufactured without any foreign assistance. More platforms must 
be built and larger and more sophisticated ones. A great deal has to be 
done for transportation, installation and commissioning of the platforms and 
for the subsequent maintenance of the platforms and the pipelines to ensure 
continuous production of oil. 

It is equally important here and elsewhere to speed up the schedules of · 
production: . Owing to the constraints of time, pefformance guarantees and 
comparative costs, we are sometimes compelled to buy advanced technology .· 
froni the international market, but I have often declared that ~either real 
development nor real defence can be bought or borrowed. The public· 
secto1 has its critics. Very often aspersions are cast which are not based on 
facts. These people can be silenced only through greater productivity and 
innovativeness. 

·The public sector in India carries a great responsibility for development. 
It has to do which the private sector is not able to do for want of capacity 
I hope our public enterprises will exert themselves with 
or willingness. 
renewed vigour to justify the investments and our expectations. 

Besides intensifying efforts for the exploration and exploitation of 
domestic resources of oil, we must curb the rate of growth of the consumption 
of oil products. The utmost economy has to be exercised in the use of 
petrol, petroleum and diesel products. 
Energy audit should become an 
annual feature of the activities of all major industrial enterprises in both the 
public and the private sectors. There is considerable scope for conservation 
in several industrial processes. 

The increase in oil prices poses a basic challenge to the technological 
countries. Their 
civilization symbolized by the advanced and affluent 
richness was based on the assumption that large quantities of energy would 
be available at low prices. The bottom has been knocked out of that 
presumption. There 
supplies are not 
inexhaustible. A frantic search has begun for alternative sources of energy. 

realization 

is now 

that oil 

One of our major priorities in India today is the R & D effort for 
alternative sources of energy. In the Sixth Five-Year Plan, the Government 
has laid emphasis on intensification of production of oil and electricity and 
the exploitation of hydro potential. Nuclear power will also be developed 

with determination. We have vast resources of solar energy waiting to be 
tapped. 

The successful completion of this project 

today highlights the 
collaborative efforts of three public sector undertakings-the Oil & Natural 
Gas Commission, the client; Mazagon Dock Limited, the fabricator; and 
Engineers India Limited, the designer.· 

I have great pleasure in signalling the flow-down of the two platforms 

in the service of our nation. 

Nature and Energy 
IT IS A privilege to address this assembly of statesmen and .. scientists. 
India has always applauded the United Nations' endeavour to bring the 
. world together for peace and prosperity. · We affirm our appreciation of its. 
efforts and commend its accomplishments.. The pleasure is enhanced by this. 
significant event taking place in Nairobi on the soil of resurgent Africa whose 
dreams and aspirations are similar to our own. 

We humans have regarded Earth as a playground to use, to despoil, 
and to destroy. We are too engrossed with the immediate, too absorbed 
with petty individual problems to look at basic issues. Today's problem 
has taken centuries to grow into its present threatening proportions. We 
are searching for new and renewable resources only because the fossil fuels 
on which we had grown dependant are fast and recklessly being depleted 
and are in the control .of a few. What we have to understand is that nothing 
will work in the long term unless there is change in our thinking, unless we 
tiny parts of an 
see ourselves not as masters of the universe, but as 
exceedingly complex system in whi_ph the smallest has a specific role. 
In 
the 
law of the cosmos, the microcosm is no less important than the 
macrocosm. 
I have never ceased to be struck with awe at the wonder of the 
balance in Nature, where waste itself is the most useful for renewal of life. 
Man, in his greed and image of power, has ignored natural laws. We have 
disturbed and continue to disturb this marvellous equilibrium and yet we 
are astonished at the dangers which confront us and which we ourselves have 
created. We must view energy in its entirety, for problems of survival and 
progress are not pieces to be put together but are inseparable parts of an 
integrated whole. 

The reality of the energy crisis hangs perilously over not only Asia and 
Africa but also the developed regions of Europe and America. We have 

Address at the United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy, 
Nairobi (Kenya), August 10, 1981 

an awesome task. The mutual interest of diverse groups and nations lies 
more than in merely preventing a military holocaust which by its very nature 
is unlikely to leave any victors. Enlightened statesmen and leading thinkers 
now forcefully argue that there is serious menace to human existence by the 
unintentional, albeit inevitable, consequences of short-sighted and self-
centred economic policies of individual nations. 

The present pattern of exploiting the world's resources and the resultant 
search for and attempt to dominate world energy sources can only cause 
friction. Monopoly over the energy potential by the affluent is depriving 
the poor, arr~sting their growth and leading to instability and insecurity. 
Similarly, within nations such serious imbalance in energy supply aggravates 
social ills, especially those associated with unplanned urbanization. 

In contemporary India, as in some other parts of the world, . energy 
experiences range from the most primary and uncomplicated forms as 
manual labour and animal power to the most advanced use of nuclear and 
solar energy technology. 
Impressive quantities of commercial energy are 
regularly produced from sources like coal, lignite, oil and the hydroelectric 
potential .of watenvays. At the same time there. is also extensive. use of . · 
familiar non-commercial sources like firewood, agricultural· wastes, and 
animai dung. Our planning is enriched but alsci complicated by the contrast 
between the organized activity in urban India and the decentralized rural 
sector. These parallel streams are sources of strength, although rising 
expectations have led to some social strains which are aggravated by the 
ever-increasing cost of energy. 

A realistic understanding of our complex social and economic conditions 
and our broader vision of the world community have helped us to try to 
shield our development from the consequences of rapid and unidimensional 
industrialization. We emphasize our commitment modestly, though firmly, 
to the rational use of energy and natural resources with the ultimate objectiv~ 
of preserving our environment. 
There is little possibility of any large-scale substitution of the existing 
Instead, we are looking for a two-tier 
structure of the energy programme. 
reorganization. Many of the promising renewable sources of energy, 
long fallen iuto disuse in the developed world, continue to provide for a 
substantial share of our energy needs, particularly in the domestic sector. 
Firewood is an obvious example, though it is inefficiently used. Such loss 
of potential energy is not restricted to unsophisticated enterprises. The 
steam engine remains relatively primitive in spite of its indispensable services. 
Similarly, there has been hardly any innovation in agricultural implements. 
We have initiated a concerted effort in research and development to improve 
energy producing and conserving tools. 
In this jet age, people refer to 
bullock carts as symbols of the past. However, in India animals provide 
more power than all our powerhouses whose installed capacity is 29,000 
megawatts. Replacing them would entail a further investment of 25 to 40 

billion dollars in electricity, over the loss to the farm economy of manure 
and cheap fuel. The fitting of tyres on traditional bullock carts has made 
them faster and reduce more than half the wear and tear of the animal, 
the cart and the road. Ball bearings on hand-driven grinding stones have 
mitigated the drudgery of village women. Modifying designs of household 
implements like stoves and better architecture for homes and public 
buildings can make an enormous difference. 

The early stages of development, bringing better health, increasing the 
iife-span and diminishing infant mortality, lead to population expansion. 
Industrial development tends to concentrate population in an unwholesome 
manner. The availability of local energy makes decentralized development 
more viable. It injects greater confidence in local development and decreases 
disparities that cause regional discontent. 

If the laws of nature are thwarted, renewable sources also will 1:,e 
exhausted. The indiscriminate felling of trees has denuded our fo.rests with 
disastrous ecological imbalances affec;:ting the very quality of life. 
In its 
sternest form Nature retaliates against the scars of' treeless mountain-sides, 
. causing landslides. and.· devastating floods and silting dams and . rivers .. 
· Rain-fall begins to dwindle and the desert resumes its deathly march. 

We are trying to harness the vast potential of sun, wind and water. 
Solar energy is already being used for cooking, for heating water and 
pumping it for irrigation, for crop drying, and so on. Another promising 
item in the new energy programme is biogas which is produced mainly 
form agricultural waste not to mention the ubiquitous water hyacinth that 
has for years been blocking waterways and clogging fields. 

The national paper that we have presented at this conference details our 
development and our programmes. We have offered suggestions for action 
at national, regional and international levels. 
India is ready to share her 
experiences and to assist our partners in world energy programmes. 

The history of developed industrial countries has been different. The 
industr_ial revolution succeep.ed because of the availability of an abundant 
and cheap supply of fossil fuels. When oil producers asserted their right 
to fix prices, these countries were startled to discover how myopic was their 
assumption that they had the right to unl.imited quantities of fuel. However, 
the adjustment process has been relatively easy for the industrialized 
countries because minor economies in consumption enable them to control 
the growth in demand and make up their losses by passing on the higher costs 
of energy through exports. So, developing countries are hit from both 
sides-the high costs of oiL and the higher costs of imports of manufacture 
and industrial raw materials. We have neither margins of waste nor the 
wherewithal to meet the increasing expenses. 

It must not be forgotten that developing countries use a mere fraction 
of the total energy consumed by industralized countries. As their standards 
of living are raised, they will demand much more conventional energy, 

··- .. ·-va-.,._. __ ,,. __ • 

It should not be imagined 
contributing to the already noticeable depletion. 
that only industrialization and urbanization demand more energy. Even 
agriculture does so. A good part of India's petroleum imports goes into 
fertilizers, and a quarter of all our electricity into agricultural operations. 
If developing nations do not get the energy they need and deserve, how can 
they fight poverty? At the same time their financial constraints deny them 
the investments necessary to harness energy through known technologies. 
That is the main reason for the search for new technologies which would 
require less capital. The concept of labour substitution of capital is a 
familiar one. We now look to technological innovation as a substitute for 
capital. Should not efficiency be measured in terms not only of the labour 
and capital saved, but of energy conserved? 
, One of the important causes of the present disturbed and insecure state 
of the world system is the scramble for the pre-emption off ossil fuel deposits 
and the accumulation of increasingly sophisticated and energy 
intensive 
weapon systems which are a, concomitant of the arms race and policies of 
confrontation. Obviously, these are aimed at maintaining the status of the 
affluent and po\verful by supporting the existing irifrastructures and dispari, 
ties. Hence the urgent need for an energy revolution. We must move from 
the present international economy, primarily dependant on hydrocarbons, 
to one increasingly based on new and renewable sources of energy. Such 
a transition is likely to profoundly change international relationships. 
Instead of the physical transfer of resources, there could be co-operation 
in harnessing widely dispersed resources with appropriate technologies. 
With proper sharing of knowledge, developing countries would not need to 
invest in rapidly obsolescent technologies and the process of transition itself 
would have a long life-span. Such a global outlook does not impinge 
the sovereignty of nations, nor is it incompatible with national 
on 
policies. 

Developed economies should be prepared to accept a portion of the 
responsibility to redefine their relationship with the developing world. The 
New International Economic Order and the principle of the common 
heritage of mankind need to be endorsed in theory and in practice. All 
international forums should aim at changing attitudes of exploitation and 
bargaining to those of co-operation and accommodation. Costs are high 
at the experimental stage and come down only as production goes up. 
It 
makes more sense for those who can afford them to go in . for substitutes 
rather than those who don't have the means. 

the immediate problem of 

Emphasis on new sources of energy is not an excuse for diverting 
the equitable sharing of 
attention from 
conventional energy. New sources are crucial for all those that have an 
abundance of present available fuels as well as those not so favourably 
endowed. A more equal distribution of conventional fuels is a significant 
step in the programme towai:ds renewable sources. 

Tiffi ECONOMIC SCENE 

No single programme may suit all countries. Each must draw up its 
own energy programme and build the necessary infrastructure. Throughout 
the world measures must be taken to increase the use of mature technologies 
in renewable energy such as the fuller harnessing of hydro. power potential, 
coal technology, large-scale programmes of reforestatiou and energy 
plantation, biogas production, the use of solar energy for low and medium 
temperature requirement~ like water heating and of wind and solar euergy 
replace 
pumping. 
endogenous development. Past mistakes can be side-stepped and research 
need not be duplicated. Technology will continuously unfold new 
possibilities. Let us take nothing for granted, least of all Nature. 

essential but it cannot 

International 

effort is 

We expect the international community to support and reinforce this 
national effort, especially of developing countries. But developing countries 
must strengthen their collective self-reliance. Technical co-operation, the 
sharing of training facilities, the exchange of experts and information, joint 
R & D programmes including the testing of equipment, mutually beneficial 
consultancy and related measures are ways to make self-reliance a reality. 
· A freer flow of technical information and a incire liberal transfer of tech:noiogy · 
from high pressure areas to depressed regions of the economic atlas should . 
become a tenet of the new world order. 

In their pursuit of technological advance, industrialized countries have 
exploited conventional energy so recklessly that they cannot now evade the 
responsibility of helping the developing world in its confrontation with this 
crippling crisis. We also find 
that companies which control oil interests 
have acquired a powerful hold over the research and development of new 
energy technology. Right now, for developing countries investible funds 
are scarcer than the energy they would protect. The mobilization of aid by 
international institutions and bilateral credit for this worth-while investment 
I should like to -express my gratitude to those countries with 
are crucial. 
investible surpluses who have ilready made appreciable gestures. 

Mutual recrimination and confrontation do not help. We, the developed, 
the developing and the underdeveloped, are in the same predicament for 
better or for worse. The United Nations has brought us here in the hope 
of enlarging the awareness of humanity and arousing the conscience of 
governments. This conference, drawing attention 
to our global 
obligations, must outline a world policy on energy, generate momentum and 
indicate courses of action. An iuternational consortium dedicated to 
mobilizing bilateral credit and aid from institutions, and which would allow 
for compact planning and monitoring of the world energy programme, would 
be most useful. We should initiate an expanded program.me for technical 
assistance in energy planning, manpower training, suppo1 t · for R & D and 
pre-investment studies. 

The energy problem is only a part of the wider concern for the 
environment and encompasses planning to prevent social tensions or 

economic conditions which compel vast numbers to migrate. Research 
and experience have indicated that new sources of energy·create less environ-
mental pollution than conventional ones. The question now posed is 
whether unscientific large scale utilization, even of new sources like solar 
energy, might invite some adverse ecological consequences. We. must 
remain on guard. Everything that is born has within it the seeds of its 
own destruction. 
I am told that physicists are talking of anti-entropic 
energy. Not being an expert, I cannot know how it will work or what will 
be its repercussions, or those of the new experiments in bio-engineering. 
May I go back to the point I made at the beginning? However great the 
rush of activity or the presssure of events, can we not make time to think 
more deeply and with a large perspective? The problems are too vast to be 
handled only by some sections of people. We, who are in public life, must 
involve the scientists, the seers of our age, the truly religious. We need 
their vision to probe and find paths which will determine the future of 
mankind and of life on earth: No matter how remarkable the new discove-
ries, the ultimate response lies in the minds of people and how wisely 
they 
- will use theni. Will they view the world as one or in fragqients? -Will they 
see t1me in compartments of past, present and future, or as a continuous 
flow of cause and effect? 

Isn't the human spirit the most 
potent of them all? Let us join in invoking the human spirit, in rescuing it 
from apathy and resignation and making it buoyant and spontaneous once 
again. We are at the threshold of a new age. Saint-John Perse, the poet, 
said : 

We speak of renewable resources. 

'We had a rendezvous with the end of an age. 

Let us join him in asking : 'Do we find ourselves with men of another 
age?' 

Let powerful call go out from this conference to make energy a focal 
point of contemporary international co-operation and collaboration. Let 
equitable distribution of our conventional stocks and joint development of 
new and renewable sources become the test for the enlightened will of nations 
to survive in comfort, in harmony and with dignity. 

·.:.v 

R&D in the Petroleum Sector 
OIL IS TO modern industry what blood is to our bodies. So, it is perhaps 
natural that it should become a politically explosive item, influencing world 
politics and world economics and leading to all kinds of tensions, alliances 
and confrontations. We cannot regard oil merely as an essential commodity 
but have always to keep in view its political sensitivity and the consequences 
of any action connected with it. 

The Minister has already told you of the oil that has been found. We 
now produce 16 million tonnes of crude annually and this, along with 
explorations we make, are part of our overall plan for self-reliance. 

The foundation of our programme for oil was laid by my father's vision 
-but his - visfon and his dream were . transformed into reality by _ the 
determination of Shri K; D. Malaviya, others like him and the band of 
technologists whom he inspired. Memories of Shri Malaviya's dynamism 
and his dedicated persistence in the face of tren1endous odds are fresh in my 
mind. Until the very end, he came up with and pursued ideas not only for 
the proper utilization of our oil resources but on new energy sources like 
fusion energy. 

This is an occasion to reflect on the larger aspects of the question which 
motivated our indigenous oil effort when the going was a really difficult 
and the scene was dominated by multinational oil companies. · The ONGC 
is a David in the company of Goliaths. After the i).rst discovery of oil in 
G¥jarat in 1958, the progress to Bombay High via Assam has been smooth 
ana sometimes spectacular. 

These developments have benefited our economy; yet we have not gone 
far enough. Oil imported at high cost is still a major drain on our resources. 
The ONGC will have to make an even bigger effort at oil exploration and 
exploitation in the same spirit of enthusiasm and purposiveness with which 
the organization has functioned 
inception. Research and 
development are important aspects of all such endeavours, specially because 
our goal of self-reliance is still out of reach. 

since its 

This Institute of Petroleum Exploration is significant for our R & D 
effort. 
It is our premier geoscientific Institute to explore hydrocarbons. 
Since its start in 1963, it has undertaken basic studies, evaluated geothermal 
prospects, developed new techniques for stimulation of wells, studied effluent 
disposal and toxicity, and also conducted a number of training courses for 

Speech at the function held to name the Institute of Petroleum Exploration after 
Shri K.D. Malaviya, Dehra Dun, December 19, 1981. 

Indians as well as other countries.. I am glad that the Institute has obtained 
a contract for research study in Abu Dhabi. 

It is apt that the Institute is being .renamed after Shri K. D. Malaviya 
at a time when it is poised for much bigger research and development. 
expect this to be linked directly to the further steps for the on-shore and 
off-shore exploration and exploitation. Data from wells studied and 
exploited will flow in more massive quantity and must be evaluated by 
con1puter techniques for which I believe the Institute is fully equipped. 

The ONGC and the Institute should constantly keep a vigilant eye on 
the rate at which we draw off our fossil fuel resources. Let us remember 
that they are not unlimited. Other oil producing countries are giving serious 
thought to the con&ervation of their oil resources. We have a large domestic 
market for oil. This gives a·dded urgency to the need to economise on non-
. renewable resources of energy and to develop renewable sources. The 
· establishment of the Commission on additional sources of energy is in 
recognition of this need and of our respollsibility. Organizations like this 
Institute and ONGC n1ust work in close collaboration with the Commission. 
I am glad that the Institute has shown interest in·. micro-biological 
It is but a step from there to micro-biological 
prospecting and control. 
methods of oil production and the conversion of organic waste into oil or 
gas. Our scientific and technological community should do as much in 
renewable energy fields as in optimising the use of the existing resources of 
oil and gas. 

A somewhat related field of research is petroleum and petrochemical 

products. Our refineries, public sector oil companies, petrochemical under-
takings, etc., should devote more attention to their R & D efforts. Quite 
_apart from the saving on foreign exchange on various consultancies and 
imports, an increase in R & D will mobilize our skilled manpower resources 
which are otherwise lost to developed countries. This talent can be used to 
study vadous aspects of establishing and running refineries, petrochemical 
complexes and so on, and to help in developing a high level of indigenization. 
In turn, this will be one way of building bridges with countries of the 
developing world which look to us for technical help. 

The R & D wings and other 

laboratories of CSIR, etc. should be 
associated from the beginning with new projects such as petrochemical 
complexes, so that they absorb technology quickly and use it for innovation 
in other new projects. Such an approach in nuclear energy and space has 
paid rich dividends in putting Indian talent and industry to work. It is 
time we thought of a similar approach in exploration and exploitation of oil 
and natural gas. This is what Malaviyaji would have liked us to do. 

I am glad to be here to give the name of Keshav Dev Malaviya to an 
institution with which he was so closely associated and which n1eant a great 
deal to him. 
I am specially happy that his family is able to be with us hen:. 
Most of you present here probably knew Sh.ri Malaviya. My own 

acquaintance with him dated back to my teens. My first clear recollection 
of Keshav Devji is of the trial of my father in Naini prison. 
I think it must 
have been 1930 when my grandfather was with us, and I remember that 
DurgaJi also was there: From then on I saw and met him through the years, 
off and on, the years of struggle and later in th,e years of development in 
free India. Throughout, he retained his shining sincerity, his bubbling 
enthusiasm and youthful spirit, and these are the qualities which we need in 
a field like oil exploration which is not entirely a new field but which has to be 
ever open to new ideas, ready to adopt the newest and the latest techniques 
and to serve the country and our people. That is the goal that we had 
before us in the independence struggle in which Shri Malaviya was a very 
valiant soldier from his youth. 

I have pleasure in declaring tWs Institute to be named after him and I 
hope that it will live up to his ideals and to what he would have wished 
I give all of you, who are connected with this Institute, my very 
for it. 
warm good wishes for nciw and for the years to conie, 

Role of Industrial and Business Community 
THE INDIAN ECONOMY has suffered considerable stresses and strains in 
the last three years. Inflation had reached a very high level; 
infrastructure 
industries seemed hardly capable of delivering the goods; and industrial 
relations had plummeted to a new low. There was no developmental effort 
with perspective, and planning see1ned to have been rolled up. The general 
picture was one of stagnation. 

Along witli.this grim inheritance, the country had to face one of the 
worst ever droughts. Nearly half of India, a hundred and forty-eight 
districts, were (and some still are) affected. The timely and well-organized 
drought management programme from January to June 1980 helped to 
bring the situation under control. 

Simultaneously, we have been giving attention to 

improving the 
performance of key sectors. A high-level Cabinet Committee 
started 
monitoring this very closely. There was a huge backlog to be made up. 
Some decisions cannot show immediate results. For exainple, thermal 
power needed priority attention for the overhauling and maintenance of 
neglected plants. But the systematic attention given to problems of such 
sectors has begun to yield results. Apart from the deceleration in the rate 

Address to the Bengal National Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Calcutta, 
Janu3.ry 4, 1981 

of inflation and higher agricultural production, power generation has 
increased substantially, particularly since October 1980. Coal production 
has been. improving from April. The prC?duction of steel, fertilizers and 
several other consumer and intermediate capital goods industries has been 
better in 1980 as compared to the year before. 

, The performance of railways also is improving as is proved by the 
larger nun1ber of wagons loaded in November and December. But we are 
conscious 
that there must be relentless effort to maintain and further 
improve efficiency. This, to some extent, is dependant on the better working 
of the wagon-building industry which is mainly in this area. 

The prospect of a further increase in oil prices is disturbing but we have 
the advantage of past experience and I think we shall manage to adjust to 
this situation. Let us not lose confidence. The rabi harvest is expected 
to be good and industrial production is bound to keep up the momentum 
already generated. Without cautious optimism how can we lay a proper 
foundation for a bright spell of planned development? ·. You will be ·glad to 
know that we ate finalizing the Sixth Plan iii the shortest possible time and it · 
is expected to give the desired thrust to our· econmny . with due regard to 
social justice. 

In this process of development, there will be difficulties for all of us at . 
some time or the other. Our farmers, who have contributed in no small 
measure to our developmental effort, are exercised about remunerative prices. 
A large section of our working class, including the small artisans and 
craftsmen, also have genuine grievances. These problems should not be 
glossed over and we should certainly do our best to solve then1 with 
understanding and sympathy. But finding solution will be easier and the 
arrangements facilitated if situations are not politicised. 

You have referred to industrial unrest. This is indeed one of the most 
disturbing factors of the present situation. The commercial and industrial 
crommunity has a special responsibility to improve labour relations and to 
look after the interest of their workers. The Government of West Bengal 
must exert itself to improve the law and order situation in the State, to curb 
violence and to give proper guidance to their unions. They cannot expect 
improvement in industry in the State unless they are willing and able to 
ensure security to managers and others who are working in the industries. 
I can assure you that no injustice has been done to West Bengal. On the 
contrary, we are fully cognizant of the problems of the State. It was during 
.my previous regime that most of the industrialization of West Bengal took 
place with major projects such as the Farakka project, the Haldia complex, 
the refinery project, the CMDA *, 
the second Hoogly bridge and the first 
underground railway project. These have either. been completed or are 
being constructed during the last one and a half de~ades, that is since 1966. 

*Calcutta Metropolitan Development Authority. 

In planning and in financial accommodation and so on, full considera-

tion has been given to the State. But it is true that the power position is 
unfortunately bad. At the same time, I am told that our offers of experts 
have not been accepted by the State Government. 

Since our Government took over this time, n1easures have been taken 
to stimulate the economy and to promote investment about which you. as a 
community, are well aware. The investment limits of the tiny sector, small 
scale units as well as ancillary units, were nearly doubled. 
Industrial 
licensing procedures were streamlined and the time limit for processing 
applications reduced. The facility of automatic growth which was earlier 
admissible only to certain engineering industries has been extended to more 
industries. 
\Ve have also announced a number of facilities for a hundred 
per cent export-oriented units. Work for oil exploration is being expedited 
and many steps have been taken to increase capacity in industries like 
fertilizer, power generation and ste'el. These measures should also give a11 
impetus. to private sector industries .. · 
· Unfortunately, the private sector · industry has not fully . risen to our . 
. . · expectations. Budgetary fiscal concessions, specially on the excise· side, 
have not been passed on to consumers. New investment is being made but 
not yet in volume sufficient to generate greater employment and an all-round 
increase in incomes. 
It is vital for private industry to plough in more 
resources so as to encourage productive activity. 
I hope there will be a 
positive action from industry in the months to come. 

While responding to our initiatives, I hope Chambers of Commerce 
like yours will promote the interests of the rising new class of entrepreneurs. 
A number of technocrats are now joining the entrepreneurial stream. 
It 
would be a very good gesture for older houses and established entrepreneurs 
to give a helping hand to these new entrants and to small industrialists as 
well as to the humblest artisans and others from the weaker sections by 
innovative efforts to arrange for production and marketing for groups of 
small entrepreneurs, especially those from rural areas. 

In the eastern region, industrial sickness and industrial relations are of 
a special nature. There have been greater constraints on account of power 
shortages and infrastructural bottlenecks. Industrial and commercial circles 
I do understand their expectation of help from 
are naturally worried. 
governments at the Centre and the States. 
proposals either for investment or for rehabilitation will 
receive our 
sympathetic attention. 
I hope the Government of West Bengal will also 
make an earnest effort to improve the situation and create a better climate for 
industrial growth. But I should also like to remind the industrial and 
business community that a great deal still depend~ on them. Production 
and productivity call for investment, risk-taking and scientific management 
In these areas, there is always scope for 
and constant modernization. 
I hope that the Bengal National Chamber which, as you 
improvement. 

I assure them that all worthwhile · 

have reminded us, 
responsibility and come up to the nation's expectations. 

is one of our oldest institutions, will shoulder this 

It has been our endeavour ever since Independence to pay the greatest 
possible attention to the rural areas. But it is only when you have the 
resources in terms of funds and goods that you can help the rural areas. 
And this can only be generated by increased production-agricultural and 
industrial. Agricultural or rural development is not possible without 
industrial progress. And, as the rest of the world gets more and more 
sophisticated, the more difficult it is for countries like ours to catch up 
and to help. Nevertheless, our capacity has been growing. We have paid 
attention to the rural areas from the beginning. As the capacity is growing 
little by little, we are doing more and more for the rural areas. But you 
know from your experience that the more backward an area, the more 
difficult it is to bring it forward. Even when money is put in, even when the 
industry is started, it takes a long time before any effect is felt in the area. 
We are conscious of this, not only because a large part of our country is and · 
probably will remain agricultura1 but becaus.ewe depend on our peasants for . 
survival and even for our industrial progress. . We want to export industrial 
goods naturally but we also want to increase our agricultural production 
so that we can meet some .of the food and other demands of neighbouring 
and other countries, thus getting 1nore foreign exchange and creating a 
sounder base for our economy. 

There is a custom of people taking New Year resolutions. 

I don't 
know whether your Chamber has taken any; if not, it is still not too late 
because the year is very young. The resolution should be to try and see 
your problems in the national 9ontext, to try and plough back your profits 
for national good and helping those who are in need of help. Only then will 
the nation be able to support you and give you the help which you ask for. 

I wish you all a year of success with the hope that your success will add 

to India'.s prosperity and stability. 

Time for Self-Restraint 
THE INDIAN MERCHANTS' Chamber, Bombay, is a pioneering institution 
of national entrepreneurs. A few days ago I addressed a similar institution 
in Calcutta. Continuing the dialogue with 
leaders of commerce and 
industry, I want to share with you today some thoughts on what each section 

Address to the Indian Merchants' Chamber, Bombay, January 13, 1981 

THB ECONOMIC SCENE 

of the nation should do to maintain the revival in the economy that has taken 
place in recent months. 

It is said that those who neglect tomorrow are condemned to repeat 
the mistakes of yesterday. The persons, who were called upon to shoulder 
the responsibility of government during 1977-79, were busy rushing into the 
past and had no time or inclination to think of the future. The result was a 
It was not a standstill but a slide-down. 
three-year industrial holiday. 
Production languished. Investment and productivity slumped in key sectors. 
Even normal maintenance of power plants, rolling stock, etc., was neglected. 
It is an index of the 
Added to all these was widespread and severe drought. 
morass in which we were caught at the time our Government took office. 
People expected miracles and instant remedies to all the maladies that had 
plagued the economy. We realized the importance of the task and initiated 
steps to get our infrastructure moving as soon as practicable. There is no 
short-cut to hard work and investment and no substitute for determination. 
With steady. application and the co-operation of managerial leaders as well 
. as the rank an(! file of laboi.ir, we have got things moving. . 

there 

In railways also 

By the end of December 1980the annual inflation rate was brought down 
to about 13 per cent as against· 22 per cent at 
the end of 1979. The 
expansion of money supply is well under control. Key infrastructure sectors 
have shown marked improvement. Thermal and hydel power generation 
has registered an increase of 20 per cent over the last two months as 
compared 
to the corresponding period a year ago. Coal production 
during April-October 1980 showed an increase of eight per cent over the 
corresponding six months of 1979. 
is distinct 
improvement. . Industrial production which was stagnating until September 
1980 has started rising. Agricultural production is expected to increase 
substantially. We have simplified procedures and liberalised industrial 
policies with a view to promoting investment and activity in key industries 
and exports. We have looked into genuine problems of labour. 
There have been some comments about my observation in Calcutta 
that industry had not adequat~ly responded to our initiatives to promote 
investment. 
I do not underestimate the difficulties of trade and industry. 
I would be the last person to claim that we, in Government, have brought 
about a total change in bureaucratic attitudes and methods of work. 
However, we are earnest about changes and have set about the task seriously. 
When so1ne segments of industry talk about difficulties, they seem to be 
referring only to difficulties in securing more public funds and credit for 
activities of their own particular sectors. · Industry must have its share of 
public funds, but can we wish away the requirements of our rural community, 
particularly the small and marginal farmers, and agricultural labourers and 
artisans? Do not small traders and small and tiny industrialists also have 
needs? · Can total growth, which also helps industry to grow, be promoted 
without increase in demand and markets? The overarching need is to 

stimulate the purchasing power of large masses of our people. This can be 
achieved by the contribution and sacrifice of the more organized sectors of 
the nation. Surely, it is not unreasonable to advocate the ploughing in of 
resources or sharing of prosperity with the consumer. 

Well-meaning and progressive entrepreneurs admit privately that they 
must avoid excessive drawals of credit to build inventory or non-productive 
assets. The siphoning off of resources through profits or the less desirable 
devices of accounting are not always conducive to further investment. How 
long can industry and trade thrive mainly on what tax revenues and borrowed 
money can do for them? 

I hope there will be an all round effort to think deeply on these matters. 
In the government we shall try to meet half way any constructive response 
from trade and industry. We await increases _in private investment. We 
have improved infrastructure and also offered fiscal reliefs. Now, with the 
finalization of the Sixth Plan, developmental programmes in the public 

. sector will be accelerated and this should benefit the private sector as well. 

I am well aware of the deficiencies of the public sector. We keep 
· prodding it. But, in fairness, we should also recall the achievements of the 
public sector and its contribution to our economy. Notwithstanding the 
scepticism, ( of flag-waving so-called Leftists and Rightists) we have made a 
mixed economy work. Organizations like yours have a responsibility in 
economy that welfare reaches unto the last. Every concession which you 
ask for should be weighed carefully in the scales of social justice. Every 
project should promote essential consumption. Every collaboration should 
lead ultimately to greater know-how and self-reliance. 

· Those, who have done well in industry, should now help newcomers 
I should like industry to develop greater 
and the smaller entrepreneurs. 
understanding of the problems of rural areas, particularly those of faimers. 
Agitational attitu~es harm the cause of farming an_d obscure the essential 
problems of agriculture. We are makihg a genuine attempt to alleviate the 
distress of small farmers. 
Industry must also do its share. Agro-processing 
industries like sugar, cotton textiles· and even exports must establish a human 
nexus with the producers. There are too many tiers of middlemen trade 
between producers and consumers. Farmers as a community feel they are 
being exploited. They want their own organizations with vertical and 
horizontal integration of all activities, including exports. 

It is time that organizations like yours, which have well established 
links with cotton farming and other agricultural occupations, remedy this 
communication gap with agriculturists. You should also see how best to 
rearrange the chain of activities starting from the ploughing of land to the 
consumption of finished agricultural products. 

Some 

industrial houses have adopted new and conunendable 
programmes of involvement with the countryside. A few, however, seem to 

have done it rather for advertisement or taxrelief than out of earnest 
conviction. 

In management-labour relations, there is need for greater understanding 
of each other's point of view. Bombay's claim to an enlightened approach 
is no longer as convincing as it used to be. There n1ust be healthy interaction 
between management and labour. Maturity and responsibility are not 
always displayed. Trade union leadership will have to think seriously of the 
overall national interest, and management too should develop a 
larger 
outlook. 

We are in the midst of a major global crisis. To the earlier threat of 
nuclear warfare or confrontation between the United States, the Soviet 
Union and China or North-South differences, have been added the problems 
of energy and environment. We are rapidly reaching a stage where the 
relevance of Western 
technologies itself is beingquestioned. · Some 
people in the West seek Shangri-La to escape from the· post-industrial 

. culture. 

. We, in India, are fortunately not so· alien!lted from Nature in ·spite of 
It may sound · 

· the p1;essure on resources from our increasing population. 
ironical to speak of Nature in Bo1ubay where trees have given way to cement 
and concrete. There is a heavy responsibility on industrialists not to disturb 
our precarious balance by the excessive consumption of energy. No one 
can escape problems of air and water pollution; so, we must all do our 
utinost 
to promote environmental reclamation and co-operation in a 
systematic effort to prevent the concentration of urban agglomerations. 
Future investments should be nearer the areas of consumption. 

Certain forms of renewable energy like solar energy will soon reach the 
stage of economic adoption by industry. I learn that some industries have 
already started ordering solar heaters from indigenaus industry. But not 
much is being done about the use of waste heat in industrial plants or 
r_:ecycling it or using energy-efficient devices. 
\Ve have to catch up now with 
these innovations and' also strengthen R & D efforts to reach these energy 
forms to as many people as pQssible. 

While there has been substantial economic recovery in 1980, we are not 
out of the shadows yet and there is no room for complacency. The rate of 
inflation is still high and continues to be a major source of anxiety. 
It is not 
possible to insulate our economy from world inflation. The cost of petroleum 
and related imports continues to mount and will have its inevitable 
impact on domestic prices. The strain on the balance of payments is likely 
to accentuate in the coming years. We have embarked on a large Plan 
involving massive programmes for the alleviation of poverty and creation of 
employment. Big investments are being made in power, irrigation, industry 
and social services. A national effort of such large proportions can be 
undertaken only by consolidating the gains which have recently become 
visible and by achieving more growth with greater stability. 

The nation must rededicate itself to the values of hard work, discipline 
and the pursuit of clearly perceived objectives of economic growth and 
It is essential to raise productivity in the factories and the 
social justice. 
farms. Lock-outs, strikes and go-slows have to be avoided, idle capacities 
must be fully utilized, and new investments brought to production without 
slippages. 

In the face of these challenges, all classes of people, whether in industry, 
trade, labour or agriculture, must exercise self-restraint in advancing and 
pursuing their sectional interests. If at this delicate stage some elements in 
trade and industry want excessive profits or try to shelter those who pursue 
anti-social practices, if the farming community agitates for large increases in 
prices, and if organized labour presses for higher wages, inflationary forces 
will again gather momentum. That will erode Plan resources and render the 
task of Plan implementation extremely difficult. 
It must be ren1embered 
that inflation hits hardest the poorer and weaker sections. This is a time 

· for self-restraint. 

Thepublfo sector should be a pace-setter in imprciving the efficiency 
of the economy. The efficient functioning of this sector can make a great 
contribution to the welfare of the nation. I hope that the workers and 
managers in railways, ports, coal-mines and other industrial units in the 
public sector will set an example to the rest of the economy by raising 
productivity and improving capacity utilization and project implementation. 
I want the public sector to become self-reliant. But so should the 
private sector be able to mobilize the necessary resources within the country 
and internationally. Only then will the government be able to devote its 
full energies to helping the weakest sections. Economic development is 
itself dependant on social justice. 

1981 will be a year of trial for all sections of our nation. The discipline 
If this is 

of hard work and self-restraint should be our watchword. 
forthcoming, we shall be able to cross the hump. 

IMF Loan 
I HAVE NOT come here to discuss the economics of the loan which my 
colleague here, the Finance Minister, has done on previous occasions in 
this House and will, no doubt, do most ably at the end of the debate, but 
because some questions have arisen on the political aspect. 
I intervened for 

Intervention in the debate on IMF loan, Rajya Sabha, New Delhi, December 3, 1981 

THI'! ECONOMIC SCBNB 

just about a minute in the other House (Lok Sabha) and I thought I would 
enlarge upon it, if I may, in this House. 

What has been alleged or insinuated is that by taking this loan we have 
deviated or are intending to deviate from our declared policy. That is w]iy 
I have come here to refute this allegation very, very strongly. 
I said in the 
other House, and I would like to repeat, that it is inconceivable that we would 
accept assistance from any external agency on terms which are not in 
conformity with our declared national policy, and this I repeat. 

Just a glance at our policies. Basically, we aim at self-reliance. 
Wherever I have been recently-I have travelled a great deal-this was 
acknowledged by the economists as well as other people of those countries 
that we had made a tremendous effort and gained, if not complete success, 
certainly some partial success in this direction. 

We stand for self-reliance. We are committed to the uplift of the weaker 
sections. We have, as the Hon. -Members know, a mixed economy in which 
the public sector holds the commanding heights. But the private sector also . 
has a legitimate .and active role. This policy was decided upon right at the·. 
' beginning by our leaders, not as a whim, but after much deep thought given 
to the special conditions that existed in India and also to the vast size of our 
population. 

Also, as we had, in our independence struggle, mobilized all sections of 
the people-the rich, the middle class and the poor, the highly sophisticated, 
the partly educated and the completely illiterate,-so in the development 
effort also no section n1ust be left out. We must mobilize this entire force 
in one direction just to make this country strong and self-reliant. 

We are also committed to build up indigenous capacity in production 
and progress, as I said earlier, towards self-reliance. ¥le are doing everyting 
possible to build up our own strength in this direction. But we found that 
we needed to import in i:>rder to increase efficiency in production, to achieve 
more rapid growth in investment and to provide essential commodities which 
were not available at home. This is the import policy which we ·are main-
taining at this moment. We have liberalised the procedures because they 
were exceedingly cumbersome and added to our proble1ns, to the problems 
of those who wanted to sell to us or to invest here. But I would like to 
assure the House that there is going to be no reversal of our policy of using 
this to develop our indigenous capacity and our self-reliance. 

We have provided and we shall continue to provide special assistance to 
the poorer sections, particularly of the backward regions, economically 
backward regions and classes, whether they live in rural or in urban areas. 
We shall continue to support programmes to meet their essential needs and 
for their economic development and advancement. 

Sinc.e ours is a mixed economy, we shall also continue to encourage the 
private sector-it is not for it to impinge on any of the areas reserved for the 
In that area, it 
State sector-in those areas which are kept aside for it. 

should grow and play a much fuller part than it is doing today in the 
development of the country's economy. But the public sector will maintain 
. the commanding heights of our economy and, I am sure, it will continue to 
expand. Our efforts are and we should redouble our efforts to make it more 
efficient to produce higher returns and to serve our social purpose. 

These are in a nutshell the basic elements of our economic policy and we 
are not going to compromise on them. There is no question of our being 
dictated to from any quarter. I think anybody, who has been abroad or who 
has been with me when I talked with these people or exchanged correspon-
dence with them, will see that we have been very firm on these points. This 
is all I wanted to say. 

. Science, Technology 

· and 

Environmen.t · 

Grow Rather than Grab Things 
THE INTEREST IN conservation is not a sentimental one but the.rediscovery 
of a truth well known to our ancient sages. The Indian tradition teaches us 
that all forms of life-human, animals, and plant-are so closely inter-linked 
that disturbance in one gives rise to imbalance in the others. 

Eight years ago, I ended my speech at the U.N. Conference on Human 
Environment in Stockholm with a stanza from the Hymn to Earth in the 
Atharva Veda. Today, I should like to begin my speech with it. 
I quote : 

What of thee I dig out, let that quickly grow over, 
Let me not hit thy vitals, or thy heart. 

This should guide our relationship with our planet-the Earth. 
In spite of hissorties into outer space, man remains earthbotind. For . 

him the Earth hold·s everything. So, he is limited to the resources of this 
planet, many of which, we now know, a:re irrenewable. 

There is need for a systematic campaign to educate governments, 
political parties, students from pre-school age onwards and others regarding 
the importance and relevance of conservation and the factors involved. 
Yet, in our anxiety to conserve other forms oflife, let us not contribute to the 
denigration of hu1nan beings. People can be taught to live in peace with 
nature and themselves only if they are assured of food, water, shelter and 
work. 

We have entered a decade which is fraught with uncertainty. The 
recent UNCTAD and UNIDO conferences did little to comfort us that the 
growing gap between the rich and the poor nations would be narrowed. 
The technologically strong continue to believe that their very power gives 
them a prescriptive right"to the world's resources. As is well known, a citizen 
in an advanced country consumes fifteen to twenty times more minerals and 
energy than a citizen of a poor country. While luxuries and comforts 
increase in the affluent nations and for a few of our own people, millions in 
Asia, Africa and Latin America, and some even in the rich countries, thirst 
for water and hunger for food. 

I have been critical of the methods adopted by industrialized countries 
not because we are wiser but because we, who call ourselves developing, tend 
to imitate the developed countries and have not yet evolved a non-exploita-
tive strategy for development. The need of the poor for a livelihood; the 
greed of middlemen for quick profits, the demands of industry and the short-

Speech at the function held to launch the World Conservation Strategy in India, New Delhi, 
March 6, 1980 

sightedness of the administration have created ecological problems. It is sad 
that even scientists, because of their collection activities, have contributed 
to the disappearance of several species of orchids and other plants in our 
Himalayan foothills. The manner in which we are encroaching upon our 
forests and mountains and are pennitting the indiscriminate cutting of 
beautiful and useful old trees is alarming. 
In spite of the Government of 
India's Forest Policy Resolution, we have lost large areas in the last 30 years. 
As a result, there have been soil erosion, floods, and the silting of reservoirs 
and rivers. Large tracts of land have become saline or alkaline. One of our 
immediate tasks is to restore the eco-systems of the Himalaya and other 
mountain ranges. Can we ensure that by the end of the century, the 
Himalaya will have the same extent of vegetative cover as prevailed at the 
beginning of this century? 

However, learned lectures on ecology and the sanctity of trees can have 
little meaning for vast numbers of our people unless we can guide them to 
other ways of financing their basic minimum needs. All those interested 
. in implementing. the World. Con~ervation Strategy should give particular 
attention to technologies which can help to meet the daily needs of such 
people, especially in the rural areas. 

Towards the end of this decade, we, in India, shall have to provide the 
necessities of life for some 800 million people and 500 million farm ani1nals. 
This task has to be so acco1nplished as to enhance, rather than diminish, the 
productivity of land and water. At my suggestion, Land and Water Use 
Boards had been established in our States, but I regret to say that their 
functioning is far from satisfactory. 

It is necessary to reiterate the need to achieve growth in the economic 
and social well-being of people throughout the world within the confines of 
a sustainable environmental resource base.· Rapid economic development 
without ecological damage can be reached only if conservation becomes a way 
of life with-every man, woman and child. Such a com1nunity sensitivity will 
have to be accompanied by a desire and capacity at the government level to 
subject developmental projects to an impact-analysis based on principles of 
ecology, economics, employment generation and energy conservation. 
Carefully designed governnient projects blended with people's action 
can alone take us to the goal to which we are rededicating ourselves 
today. 

Conservation cannot remain the responsibility solely of the government. 
Oflicial and voluntary agencies must work together to create greater 
awareness. An example comes to mind. Our cities and towns are growing. 
To provide bricks for houses and offices, brick-kilns are cropping up 
everywhere, using up fertile soil from the top layers. Do the people who use 
the bricks, and do the brick-makers know that it takes Nature over a century 
to make one centimetre of top-soil? If owners of houses. realize this, it 
would soon become possible to prevent haphazard digging up of soil for 

SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY A1'.'D ENVIRONMENT 

bricks. · Brick-making can be linked 
to the creation of permanent 
community assets, such as farm-ponds or water channels, through a careful 
choice of sites for kilns based on the topography of a given area. 

· The lack of an integrated approach 

to pest control has led to the 
re-emergence of malaria. 
Inadequate interaction among those in charge 
of agriculture and fisheries leads to difficulties in sustaining ancient practices 
such as rice-cum-fish or prawn culture. The indiscriminate killing of snakes 
for their skins leaves no check on the increase of field rats. These are just a 
few instances. 

We usually club together the words 'science' and 'technology'. But 
much technology is unscientific, for it is directed towards immediate and 
sometimes unnecessary consu1nption, neglecting long-term welfare. How 
long can civilization endure on a basis of reckless exploitation? Nothing 
in life is wholly good or wholly bad; it all depends on how things are used 
and done. Many apparently beneficial projects have harmful consequences. 
If drainage is nqt properly planned, irrigation: leads to salinity .. Pesticides 
. help greater yields, but used inc;l.iscriminately, they spoil fruit and vegetable .. 
There should be more systematic educ.ation in regard to their application. 

The Indian Neeni tree, once so popular and ·put to a hundred uses in 
sickness and in health, is now sadly neglected in our ·country, but it is being 
planted to bring greenery to what was once a desert area of Nigeria. There 
should be greater exchange of information among nations about suitable 
plants and practices. 

I hope that the launching of the V,/ orld Conservation Strategy today will 
be followed by vigorous efforts all over our country to design and promote 
simple programmes of eco-development of educational and econo1nic value 
to the local population. Programmes such as 
'a tree for every child', 
'nutrition gardens', forest farming, the raising of energy plantations, organic 
recycling through the conservation and use of all waste products and the 
harnessing of renewable forn1s of energy based on sunlight, wind an:d bio-gas 
· are all potentially valuable mass movements, provided they are formulated 
thoughtfully and implemented with the involvement of the local population. 
The literature prepared for the Conference is interesting. The maps 
are particularly revealing. They show how man is eating hin1self out of 
hearth and home, indeed burning up the earth and himself. 

Nature is beautifully balanced. Each little thing has its own place, 
its duty and special utility. Any disturbance creates a chain reaction which 
may not be visible for some time. Taking a fragmentary view of life has 
created global and national problems. 

In his arrogance with his own increasing knowledge and capability, 
man has ignored his dependence on the earth and has lost his communion 
with it. He no longer puts his ear to the ground so that the earth can 
whisper its secrets to him. He has tut his links from the elements and has 
weakened resources which are the heritage of millions of years of evolution-

all those living or inanimate things which sustained him and gave him inner 
energy : earth, water, air, the flora and the fauna. This loosening of his 
intuitive response to nature has created a feeling of alienation in him and is 
destructive of his patrimony. So, while we have to think of conservation, 
we have also to think whether man himself is growing into a being worth 
saving. 

The national song which inspired our freedom movement describes our 
land as one endowed with water and fruit, rich with the greenness of growing 
plants. We must make this true not only of India but of all lands. Some 
people are said to have green fingers. The aim of the World Conservation 
Strategy should be to ensure that every man, woman and child on Earth 
has fingers that will grow rather than grab things. 

I welcome this initiative of the International Union for Conservation of 
Nature and Natural Resources, the United Nations Environment Programme, 
the World Wildlife Fund, FAO and UNESCO and have pleasure in launching · 
. the \Vorld Conservation Strategy in India. 

Launching of SLV-3 
I HAVE PLEASURE in informing the House that the first successful launch 
of the Indian Satellite Launch Vehicle SLV-3 took place this morning at 
8 :03 :45 hours fro1n Sriharikota Range. The Launch Vehicle placed a 
35 kg Indian satellite Rohini RS-1 in orbit around the Earth. The satellite 
will orbit the Earth approximately once every 90 minutes. SHAR will see 
two orbits for the first time tonight. Thereafter every twelve hours two 
more such orbits will be seen over SHAR in regular periodicity. 

The four-stage all-solid propellant vehicle has been developed in India 
by Indian scientists and engineers, The total development cost of the SLV-3 
is about Rs. 20 crores and the present experimental launch has cost about 
rupees one crore. The Rohini satellite in orbit is intended mainly to measure 
the performance parameters of the Vehicle and is being tracked by our 
national tracking network. 
Initial indications are that the Vehicle and the 
satellite are functioning satisfactorily. 

The collection of tracking data and the analysis are continuing. 
This is a notable achievement for India and for Indian science. 

I am 
sure the House will join me in congratulating our scientists and technicians 
of the Department of Space. The nation is proud of them and wishes them 
further successes. 

Statement in Lok Sabha on the launching of SLV·3, New Delhi, July 18, 1980 

Tasks Before the Indian Scientists 
I BELONG TO a generation which has special veneration for science. 
While we have since learnt that science has not and cannot solve all the 
problems, we know that it is the basis for progress and a catalyst for change. 
Hence the special importance which we give to the advancement of science 
and technology in our country. 

India has had a long and distinguished tradition in science from the 
earlier period associated with the names of Aryabhata, Bhaskara, Charaka, 
Susruta and many others to the modern period with men such as Srinivasa 
Ramanujan, Jagadish Chandra Bose, Satyen Bose, Meghnad Saha, C. V. 
Raman, Homi Bhabha and others. 
I am glad that I have had the privilege 
of knowing many of those personally and having them as guests in our home. 
We also have today one of the . largest scientific and · technological 
communities in the wodd. This is a great and dynamic resource which is a 
cause for satisfication. 

Today's function is taking place soon after Indian science has scored 
yet another major success-the launching of the SLV-3 and Rohini. The 
entire nation congratulates all these brilliant and dedicated scientists who 
have participated in this achievement. This success has been noted in other 
countries. But, as usual, certain unwarranted inferences have been drawn 
by some commentators about its possible military potential. 
I should like 
to reaffirm that Indian science is dedicated to peace; its motive is development. 
All the major achievements of Indian science so far have occurred in its 
search for peaceful uses and not as a spin-off of defence requirements. This 
is true of Pokharan and of Sriharikota. 

Equally spectacular and closer to the lives of our masses was the success 
of our scientists in helping us t() attain self-sufficiency in foodgrains. The 
world always ignores such efforts and even our own urban people and Media 
do not seem to appreciate the magnitude of the crisis caused by drought 
which we have largely overcome. 

The true contribution of science is to endow the nation with competence 
and confidence. The work done in agriculture has to be consolidated and 
extended. Even in grain production, with our present infrastructure and 
capabilities; we ought to be producing 50 per cent more cereals. We should 
now ensure self-sufficiency in oilseeds and cotton. The production of several 
kinds of protective and nutritive foods should be augmented. Similarly, 

Speech at -the presentation ceremony of the Shanti Swarup Bhatnagar Prizes for Science 
and Technology for 1978 and 1979, New Deihl, July 25, 1980 

in nuclear energy, our acknowledged capabilities should be directed to points 
which will obviate the need for supplies from abroad. 

Science must make itself felt, to a far greater extent, in the entire terri-

tory of industry. The average levels of performance, capacity utilization, 
maintenance and productivity must increase. We must expedite the transition 
from a hierarchical, bureaucratic culture in our administration to a culture 
which will be result-oriented and would encourage team work. 

One of the least defensible attitudes of those who held the reins of power 
in 1977-79 was to make our scientists feel unwanted. Their aspirations were 
denigrated and they were denied financial, political and moral support which 
is their due and which was justified by the services they had already rendered. 
I am told this is one of the main reasons for lowering the morale of our 
scientists. 

I should like to reassure our scientists that my Government acknowledges 

their value and is detern1ined to give support to their programmes of investi-
gation and development, subject only to usual overalifmancial constraints. 
··Our basic objective is self-reliance .. · This does not 1nean making every-. 
thing ourselves, but acquiring the capacity to do so when things come to a 
head. No foreign power should be in a position to put pressure on us or to 
exploit our shortages. The more self-reliant we become, the less vulnerable 
we are. 

Much of contemporary scientific research needs enonnous investment. 
Hence in all countries, it is dependant, to a larger extent, on the government. 
However, I do feel that the scientists themselves must evolve the goals for . 
research. I reveal no secret in telling that the number of letters I receive as 
Prime Minister from scientists on scientific matters is a minute fraction of 
those from politicians and others on political matters. It is true that there 
are vastly more politicians, active or arm-chair, than there are scientist§. 
Even so, I urge scientists to take the lead in educating the government allil 
the public on how changes can be broug11t about. 

Our administrative outlook places a special reliance on rules as if rules 
existed to be obeyed rather than to serve the people. The ad1ninistration of 
our scientific departments, laboratories and institutes leaves much to be 
desired. Scientists often complain about the bureaucratic procedures and 
delays. But so pervasive is the prevalent culture that they themselves some-
times fall into the same rut, wanting conformity rather than co-operation, 
and putting higher store by reports than results. Scientists should advise us 
on how to change the scientific administration. Modern management has 
learnt much from science and tries hard to induct scientists and technologists 
into management. Lord Snow used to say that a scientist in a department 
is worth two in a laboratory. By quoting this, let it not be thought that I 
favour an exodus of scientists from the bench to the desk. Far from it. All 
Tam saying is that solutions can be found if scientists initiate a creative 
dialogue with adn1inistrators. 

Overall nrganizational changes in our scientific departments and agencies 
are essential. We are also committed to providing better working and living 
conditions for our scientists. We produce an impressive number of scientists 
and technologists at the nation's expense, but ·we cannot compete now or 
even in the near future with advanced countries in the 111atter of pay or the 
provision of intellectually challenging opportunities. So, we find that a 
good number of Indians work abroad. fv!any have even adopted foreign 
nationality. When an Indian does good work anywhere, it is a matter of pride 
for us. But we also want them to work more for our own country. We 
hope to devise schemes by which we can take advantage of the expertise and 
skills that our scientists have gained elsewhere. 

Scientists do not live in their own world. They are an integral part of 
general society. It is for them to discern what is socially relevant and vital. 
Only to a very few is it given to be original and to give new direction to 
knowledge. The vast numbers are necessarily engaged in applying known 
knowledge to problems in their surroundings. 
I\1aµy are the problems . 
and challenges in ou,r very midst callirig for scientific research of the highest . · .. 
· order. In attempting to ftndlocal solutions, inajor discoveries often occur .. 
Ronald Ross's. work on the connection between malaria and the mosquito 
was done here. The great work of the French scientist Louis Pasteur on the 
fermentation of beet sugar, the anthrax disease of sheep and on rabies, were 
all concerned with practical problems encountered in his immediate vicinity 
which led to revolutionary changes in biology. 

To 1ny father, planning was the application of science to national 

problems. Some problems have been solved; many many more remain. 

Time and again I have invited scientists to turn their attention to the 
problems of our farmers and housewives, to :find new uses for available 
materials. To cite an example, today we have a shortage o( cooking oil. 
Yet we waste rice bran, which is a great resource. 

A scientist's best reward is the excitement of working at the very frontiers 
of existing· knowledge, the satisfaction of his intellectual curiosity, and the 
joy of creative activity. 
Scientific research is also· characterized by wide 
dissemination. Only that work is finally recognized as scientific truth which 
has universality and is accepted by the scientific community as a whole. 
That is how scientists acknowledge the judgement of their peers. 

The Council of Scienti.5.c and Industrial Research, as the premier national 
organization, concerned with a wide range of scientific research and aspect 
of application, decided to award from 1958 onwards the Shanti Swarup 
Bhatnagar Prizes in various disciplines of science and 
to 
commemorate its founder Director. Dr Shanti Swarup was not only an 
eminent scientist but also a person of outstanding administrative and 
organizational ability. His role as one of the chief architects of large-scale 
organized research is well known. This very laboratory was the first research 
establishment he built. 

technology 

The Bhatnagar awards have come to command prestige. They are a 
fitting tribute to a man who dedicated his life to science and to the nation's 
progress. 

I warmly congratulate the winners of the Bhatnagar awards for 1978 
and 1979, each of whom has made a significant contribution in his chosen 
field. 

A question has been raised in the foreign Press in the last couple of 
days: Why should a poor country like India launch an SLV-3 or have a 
peaceful nuclear experiment? I think it is to show that we are not poor in 
talent or capability, because there is such a thing as pride in one's nation 
and pride in one's achievement. For me, science is an endless search for 
ever looking forward and upward. As a mountaineer has said: When the 
last problem is solved, there will be yet another. Man's need to measure 
himself against the unknown and the impossible will never be satiated. 

Once more, I thank the distinguished scientists whi:> are gathered here 

and I give them my best wishes for their future. 

Global Conference on the Future 
IN OUR CENTURY, man can see and hear at the speed of light and 1nove faster 
than sound. Knowledge that earlier needed vast libraries to contain is now 
on discs held in the palm of one's hand. The discoveries of molecular biology 
as also the development of weapons of destruction have almost obliterated 
the line between life and non-life. Mind and memory are being stretched by 
the stupendous growth of computer technology. 

Ye( are human beings wiser or happier? Where are we going? Progress 
is in one direction, ignoring all side-effects. Should we not pause to ponder 
on the fundamentals of our increasingly complex existence? 

In any discussion on the future of mankind, we cannot afford to under-

emphasize the actual state in which its vast majority lives in what is called 
the developing world. Despite the natural resources and traditional cultures 
of their lands, this huge segment of humanity is condemned to poverty. 
If these millions cannot be assured of their basic essentials, what meaning 
can discussion on the protection of our environment or of preserving the 
ecological balance or of saving wildlife have for them? Can we ever hope to 
achieve a world free of tension if the greater proportion of humanity lives 

Message sent on July 28, 1980 to the First Global Conference on the Future held 
Toronto, Canada 

in 

in want, while a small affluent minority monopolises the benefits of modern 
technology? 

The ancients in India perceived cosmice nergy in its triple aspects, of 
creation, preservation and destruction. Science has been used for technologies 
of destruction. It has also created new man-made materials. The time has 
come to give more attention to skills of preservation. Concern with the future . 
cannot be a form of reverse archaeology. We must discover the art of living 
with Nature and growing with evolution. How long can we draw upon the 
exhaustible resources of the earth? Many new forms of energy await 
harnessing. 

Action can only follow thought. We are imprisoned in the old thought 
processes pursuing the same old greeds and desires. Action plans will fructify 
only if our thinking breaks through these barriers and our vision stretches 
into the 21st century. The issues that affect Africa and Asia now and will 
continue to do' so for years·to come are well known and oft-debated, But 
the world is dominated by.· tl;J.e developed . affluent nations who know the . 
· world's great wrongs but do not act. 

· The First Global Conference on the Future deals with a fascinating 
subject. Thinking people everywhere will be interested in its conclusions. 
I send my greetings to the distinguished delegates. 

Self-Reliance Through Science 
I HAD REALLY come here with the i~tention ~f listening rather than talking, 
but it seems that old traditions die hard, and, also that it is necessary at this 
point of time to reiterate certain matters. Some of the points have already 
been made by Prof. Nurul Hasan. But, for public consumption, it is necessary 
that I also say them. 

This meeting follows the detailed discussions which Prof. Nurul Hasan 
has had with a large cross-section of leading figures in scientific research and 
science administration on how science and technology can serve the nation 
better. 

The architect of our planning, Jawaharlal Nehru, irrevocably committed 
our nation to science. In the opening chapter of the Third Plan, which he 
wrote himself, he set out the social objectives of India and the integral part 
of science in their realization : 

Speech at the meeting of scientists held to discuss the Plan Frame for Science and 
Technology 1980-85, New Delhi, August 2, 1980 

SBLECTED SPEECHES AND WRITINGS OF INDIRA GANDHI 

"The more immediate problem is to combat poverty, with all the 
ills that it produces, and it is recognized that this can only be done by 
social and economic advance, so as to build up a technologically mature 
society and a social order which offers equal · opportunities to all 
citizens.... It involves not only the acceptance of the temper and 
application of science and modern technology, but also far-reaching 
changes in social customs and institutions." 

Are these words not equally relevant for our Sixth Pian? To me, science 
. is not just an incidental concomitant or product of planning. It is at the 
very core of development. It is often said that political will is the prime 
mover of progress. But all the will in the world cannot produce results if 
it is not yoked to science and technological and adn1inistrative capability. 
In the last couple of decades, Indian science has made visible headway. 
The world now knows-. thanks to the technological capability we have built 
up-thatlndia can achieve whatever goal she sets for herself. We are at a 
stage when this capability, which 
·u1ieven, . has to . be 
consolidated. Correct decisions have to be taken now so that the process . 
of change is faster and surer in the immediate future. 

is. still . rather 

Science must help us to speedily improve production. It should show 
how the latent natural and human resources can be profitably developed 
and equitably shared. It should help us to create more employment and 
reduce drudgery. It. should strengthen the 11:ation and red,ice our vulnerability. 
It should make our society hardier and more resilient. 

Besides these n1aterial goals, we look to science to eradicate old irrational 

attitudes which hold the nation back from its true greatness. 

Hence, a SO\lnd Scien9e and Technology Plan is a crucial segment of the 
general Plan. As Professor Nurul Hasan has pointed out, we initiated this 
task some years ago. I hope that as a result of your discussions at this 
meeting, the S & T component of the 1980-85 Plan will become more pur-
posive and practical in terms of results. 

Self-reliance must be at the very heart of science and technology plan-

ning. There can be no other strategy for a country of our size and endowments. 
While we all readily pay obeisance to this concept, there are too many and 
too frequent lapses. There are reasons. It is an axiom of modern technology 
that the late starter cannot catch up. And India was a late starter. By the 
time we reach any milestone; we find that the competitors have moved far 
ahead. At some bends in the race we might be able to take a couple of short 
cuts and leap over some intermediate stages. But the advanced nations rarely 
give up their advantages. Last 1nonth, we became the sixth nation in the 
world to acquire satellite launching capacity. Yet we could claim only that 
our technology was just a little more sophisticated than that of other nations 
when they launched their early 'birds'. While we set about building indi-
genous R & D with all its attendant uncertainties in terms of performance, 

SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND ENVIRON¥BNT 

practised hands can offer us more advanced technology. Considerations like 
security, time factor, performance guarantee and costs, often compel us 
to buy advanced technology from the international n1arket. But, in the 
ultimate analysis, neither true defence nor true development can be bought 
or borrowed. We have to grow them ourselves. 

So, it is imperative for us to make every kind of necessary investinent 
in ensuring self-reliant development. Alongside a few urgent and inescapable 
needs for which we have to import technology, programmes should be worked 
out to assimilate it so that we obviate repetitive in1port at the earliest. In 
order to ensure this, we should associate R & D experts to a greater degree 
in the work of project assessment and import decisions. 

Indigenous results of research must be integrated with the development 
process and kept in mind while deciding 011 the import of technology and 
on choices for industry. Fiscal policies should be so evolved as to encourage 
the utilization of the results of research and indigenous capabilities, rather 
than supporting indiscriminate import of technology or goods. Further, a 
conscious effort should be made by all niajor ministries and. oi:ga11izations to 
· establish effective interface with the scientific and technological conuii.unity. · 
There is a widely current belief that Indian science has not yielded 
results con1mensurate with investment. Some of this criticism is based on 
ignorance and on. our national pastime of playing up shortcomings while 
ignoring achievements. Yet, I know that rnany scientists themselves feel 
that they could do much better if there was a clearer definition of tasks and 
less bureaucratization. I hope that every organization and every scientist 
will make a determined effort to find answers rather than alibis. Indian 
science can do it. And I am sure that you will vindicate this confidence 
whether it be in agricultural production or in energy fuels, in communications 
or in. the improvement of health. 

In apportioning our scarce resources, we determine our priorities. Thus, 
atomi~ energy, electronics and space got their fair share of resources 
because of their far-reaching significance in promoting development and 
self-reliance. 

We must now make urgent and all-out scientific effort to promote the 
development and utilization of solar and other forms of renewable energy 
to reduce our dependence on fossil fuels and to help safeguard our 
environment. Swift scientific action is also needed in regard to our marine 
and seabed resources. The scientific community must give a lead in these 
matters. We shall not be wanting in the response or the matching adminis-
trative action. 

I agree with many of the points made in your Draft Document, especially 
in relation to Food, Forestry, Nutrition, Population Stabilization and 
Energy. I endorse in particular the statement that science and technology 
have a role to play in accomplishing Plan targets at minimum cost and maxi-
mum benefit. You are also right in drawing attention to the gestation period 

if 

involved in science and technology. What we are using now was discovered 
some time ago. Ifwe care about the future, we should give the required thrust 
to science and technology here and now. 

Science and the Government 
I AM INDEED honoured and delighted to take part in the golden jubilee of 
this Academy which is one of our three premier organizations of scientists 
and has been connected with such celebrated scholars as Meghnad Saha 
and .Birbal Sahni. It is a matter for special gladness that one of its founders, 
Prof. N.R. Dhar, is. with us today. Knowledge is one asset that never 
depreciates. Prof. Dhar is a symbol of that truth. To him and to all members 
of the Academy, I give my greetings, 

What a relief that this Academy was born before the accelerated rush 

to have headquarters in Delhi. It is a reminder of the old days when Allaha-
bad loomed high in the intellectual landscape of India. We have always felt 
that Nature meant Allahabad to be i1nportant. For millennia, Prayag has 
been a hallowed spot for people from all parts of our country. Ancient 
civilizations mostly grew on river banks, and the meeting places of great 
rivers have always attracted pilgrimage and commerce. During British 
rule, outside of the three presidency towns, Lahore and Allahabad were 
regarded as India's most important cities. The earliest universities and High 
Courts other than those of Bombay, Calcutta and Madras were located in 
Allahabad and Lahore. The city made its own very special contribution to 
our freedom movement. For two exiciting, exacting and eventful decades, 
the main office of the Indian National Congress, the centre of decision-
making, was here. 

I had better not say more about Allahabad, lest I be accused of partiality. 
But coming here is a very nostalgic m0111ent. Familiar faces and familiar 
crowds bring back memories. Can we hope that Allahabad will aspire to a 
future no less glorious than its past? 

In this city of confluence and at a forum like this, what would be more 
appropriate than to speak about the confluence between science and 
government? Each in its own separate way is a repository of power and an 
instrument of change.· Whatever ideology or system of government any 
contemporary society follows, it has to give the most careful attention to 
what Einstein called the "sensible use of science". This is one of the major 

-Address at the golden 
Allahabad, October 23, 1980 

jubilee celebrations of the National Academy of Sciences, 

SC::IENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND ENVJRONMENT 

problems of modern government. Carlyle said that if history. had long 
been the root of science, in the future science would be the root of history. 
This has been borne out in the last century. 

Planned support for.science has been one of the major characteristics · 

of governmental policy in Independent India. Jawaharlal Nehru recognized 
that change of material conditions and means of production could be brought 
about only through a programme of scientific research and develop1nent. 
Science to him was the Bow of Shiva with which to vanquish poverty. I 
do not have to recount the various steps that were taken to build a chain of 
national laboratories and centres of research and advanced technological 
training and to integrate science into our planning process. 

The intention was not to bring science under the State. But the State 
had to step in because our universities, even though they had produced 
individual scientists of outstanding ability and brilliance, did not have the 
resources for the investigation of problems and projects of social relevance. 
Like British universities, our own_ were dominated by the literary tradition . 
and practised what Madawar called "a consciow; ::j.nd inexplicably· self-
righteous disengage1nent from the pressures of necessity and use". 

At the same ti1ne, we did not have Britain.' s industrial base\vhich fostered 
applied research. (Anyhow, industry usually sponsors research primarily 
to maximise profit!) Also, as there was no base of specialised problem-
oriented research, we had to create a large body of scientists and technologists 
who would form the sinews of self-reliance. 

This policy has paid dividends inasmuch as today we can claim to have 
111en who can handle the nation's technological challenges, even if the tangible 
returns are not fully proportionate to investments. It may be that, in the 
process, our universities have been weakened. The time has come to once 
again strengthen science in universities without any depreciation of our 
specialised laboratories. 

Research today requires vast quantities of sophisticated equipment. 
The days when Rutherford's laboratory could make do with an annual grant 
of £2,500, or C.V. Raman could discover the secrets of light with a few gems 
and crystals, are gone, never to {:eturn. The capital-intensivity of sophisti-
cated science brings government into the administration of science in a big 
way. In the words of Sir Solly Zuckerman, "Science has now become so 
· great a force in society that it has to be planned. This is on account of its 

size and cost and the need to manage it efficiently and wisely". 

In all societies, scientists are invading government in large numbers. 
Sir Winston Churchill believed that scientists should be not on top but on 
tap. But more and more official agencies and institutions, involving science 
and technology, are being placed under scientists. And this is as it should be, 
and this is our policy too. 

But scientists are also human, and it is sad but true that oftea .enough 
they contract the bureaucratic bacillus of rank consciousness or develop 

intolerance of alternative approaches. This is not the spirit of science. 
Science needs constant interchanges allowing scientists to express themselves 
more freely and frequently on the objectives and priorities of scientific work 
Problems of the field must continuously be 
and national development. 
fed back to laboratories. My father constantly spoke of the scientific temper. 
Scientists should educate other citizens in the implications of science and 
technology, and collectively, through organizations like this Academy, engage 
in a constructive dialogue with government. Instead of scientists seeking 
directives from government, we expect ideas to flow from them and from 
academies to government. 

An urgent need today is that of energy. Immediate and intensive work 
n1ust be undertaken for renewable resources. A continuing problem is that 
of reducing drudgery and bringing economic prosperity to our rural areas. 
Agricultural research and a number of inventions and processes have 
increased productivity and helped the well-being of farmers. In medicine 
and public health, research and organization have to b.e dire~ted towards 
the effective eradication of a whole range of diseases, especially,vater-borne 
disorders. I am told it is now feasible to wipe out leprosy and to · pre~ent 
or cure at least 15 per cent of blindness: Isn't it worth making the effort to· 
do so? 

An eminent physicist speaks of "the fundamental oneness displayed at 
the microscopic level of physics where all phenomena are inter-related and 
cannot be viewed as autonomous and isolated events or processes". I am 
stating this merely to reiterate my favourite theme that life is one and cannot 
be divided up into compartments. Hence, science cannot be con__n.ned to 
laboratories or universities but must be a part of education, health, all aspects 
of development; it must be with life in the home, in the field ana in the factory. 
Science must be not a follower but a pace-setter, not merely reacting to 
problems but anticipating them. 
It must be our support in 111eeting 
challenges; our tool in peace and our weapon in war . 

. -Through the centuries, as discovery after discovery revealed ne~1 
knowledge, science remained largely dogmatic and deterministic, believing 
in the visible and the felt. Relativity and the quantum theory shook the 
very foundations of that belief. Here in Prayag, a centre of learning, ancient 
and modern, it is fascinating to see that present-day science is now coming 
to terms with ancient philosophy. In recent years, a number of books have 
been appearing by scientists and others noting the similarity between 
concepts of contemporary physics and the essence of Eastern 111ysticism. 
Dr. Capra, a research physicist currently lecturing at the University of 
California, writes: "Modern physics has shown us that movement and rhythm 
are essential properties of matter, that all matter whether here on Earth or in 
outer space, is involved in a continued cosmic dance". And this he likens 
to the dance of Shiva, "the eternal 
life-death rhythm which goes on in 
endless cycles, not fundamental but illusory and ever-changing". 

SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY A!'s'D ENVIRONMENT 

Once again, I give my good wishes to the members of the National 
Academy of Sciences and have great pleasure in inaugurating its golden 
jubilee celebrations. 

Encouragement to Scientists 
I AM GLAD to participate in honouring our eminent scientists. It is a 
matter of satisfaction that the nmnbe1; of honours and awards for scientists 
is growing. But I do not know if this growth matches with the growth in the 
number of scientists. in our country. 

Judging fro1n 

its name, the Hari Om Ashram must be concerned 
primarily with philosophical pursuits .. Its interest in n1odern sciences is 
commendable and signifies the growing convergence of the scientific and · 
the spiritual aspects. Ind~ed; this was something that always existecL It is 
only that ,ve are becoming more conscious of it now. 

The word Vigyan was used by our ancients in both contexts. So indeed 

was the word philosophy in the West. 
gress was more in philosophy than in arts, now it is the age of science. But, 
more and more we are realizing that unless we take all these matters together, 
there will be imbalances in our work, in our thinking and consequently in 
the results achieved. 

Just as there were periods when pro-

The awards given today are for physical, applied, theoretical and life 
sciences, and for interaction between scienc® and society. The awards have 
been named after so1ne of our greatest men of science. 

The role of science in every society today is so in1portant and the 
investments involved so large that in practically every country, governments 
have come in a big way into the administration of science and the financing 
of research. Have you any statistics about the relative nun1ber of scientists 
in private industry, in universities, in government, and other agencies? 

And while on the subject of scientists, I may bring in something which 
may not be entirely relevant to this occasion but, I feel, has to be dealt with. 
It is a matter that has been worrying me for a considerable time. The manner 
in which we form the statistics seems to n1e not really relevant to the state of 
affairs in the country. The system is taken from countries which have entirely 
different backgrounds, different ways of looking at things and different 
achievements, and we seem to follow it with the result that what should be 
a matter for pride and progress for us co1nes out as something against us. 

Speech at the function held to give away the Hari Om Ashram Trust Awards in Science 
for 1976, New Delhi, November 15, 1980 

For instance, our GNP. Because we have now a longer life span, the figure 
of per capita has been adversely affected. Because we have a greater 
spread of education, the figure of educated unemployed is larger. There 
are 1nany such things. One hears about the growth of poverty, of the number 
of undernourished children. I do a great deal of travelling and not all along 
the main roads but to places where there are no roads, I did so especially 
in the last three years when I did not have the official conveyance. I can say 
that I hardly saw a single case of a child who was suffering from malnutrition. 
In the crowds of people that came to the same place, year after year, you see 
they have better health, their eyes are brighter and they are better dressed. 
It does not mean that we have got rid of the problem of poverty. But the 
situation is improving which everybody, even people who come from outside 
and who have moved into the hearts of these places, can see. Yet our statistics 
point in the opposite direction. Something must be done to look into this 
matter with greater seriousness and detail, and we should evolve indexing 
which give a truer picture of what is happening in India. 
It has been my constant effort to· ensure .that those scientists who work 
with the gov~rri.ment have the fullest measure of self-govermnent and have a . 
decisive voice in decision-malcing. They should ·not be subordinated to 
bureaucratic procedures. I must confess that we have not, with all the efforts 
we have made, been able to check the demon of bureaucratism. It does not 
mean that all those who are in government service act like bureaucrats. 
Fortunately, they don't, otherwise we would have never achieved anything. 
V-le have a large number of dedicated public servants, but the system of the 
word as it implies, is, I am afraid, very much with us. The simplest matter 
gets delayed for some technical or not very important reason, and delay is 
the source not only of lack of progress, of frustration but also of corruption. 
I want scientists who are entering government in increasing numbers to 
show up how to deal with the sprawling octopus of such a bureaucratic 
approach. We are all to blame in this and scientists are no exception. There 
are also delays in departments headed by scientists. Of course, many of 
them have to travel a great deal and this 111eans that office work or other 
routine things tend to suffer. 

I have also been greatly concerned about the inter relationship between 
the specialized scientific institutions and the universities. Laboratories 
have naturally to deal with problems of immediate application, but they 
must also have the larger theoretical base which will enable them to deal 
with specific problems. But the universities cannot abrogate their duty of 
carrying on advanced work of the highest order. They must simultaneously 
try to gain new insights, make discoveries and keep the specialized institutes 
on their tOes. Administrators sometimes counsel us to avoid duplication, 
and this is right. At the same time, in the search for scientific truth, we 
cannot afford to be simplist_i~, for there is no guarantee that the lightning 
of revelation will strike at the single pre-determined place. 

I welcome the~various measures adopted by the U.G.C. to encourage 
science in universities like the establishment of centres of advanced studies, 
the merit promotion scheme, etc. I have had discussions with a large number 
of persons on what further measures should be taken to strengthen science 
in our universities. The matter of funding research projects occupies a 
lot of attention. Senior persons who decide what might be supported should 
be perhaps a little more kind to the rebels and the non-conformists as well. 
Research is important. But we should not, in the name of research, 
neglect the importance of teaching. Perhaps you remember that after the 
Nehru Memorial Lectures some years ago, Professor Chandrasekhar, the 
Astrophysicist, was asked whether he could have achieved what he did, 
had he stayed in India. He replied, "Possibly not, but possibly seven or eight 
of my students might have". A great teacher becomes a kindler. There is 
also often a debate about quality versus quantity. Obviously, we have to 
try for both. Science is an effort towards excellence: Merit cannot be ignored 
or denigrated. 

I congratulate the winners of the Hari Om Trust Awards. They are not 
new to Ja:urels and commendations but, I think, to be honoured by U.G.C. 
must still count. 

Science and Environment 
,-r HIS YEAR'S T+IEME for the Indian Science Congress is after 111y own heart 

and one with which I have long been concerned. It is appropriate that you 
should meet in this ancient seat of learning. The Ganga and Varanasi have 
been symbols of continuity in Nature and in man's mental and moral quest. 
For us who live in under"developed countries and are grappling with the 
age-old problems of poverty, the conservation of the envirorunent cannot 
be at the cost of development War at one end and poverty at the other 
are the worst of all polluters of the human condition. We need balanced 
development and peace to rescue civilization from this predicament. The 
ecology movement must proceed hand in hand with the movement for peace 
and the fight against economic backwardness. 

At the time of our independence and in the fifties, we all looked forward 
to a brave and bright new world. We had unbounded faith in science and 
the miracles it would work to eradicate the ills of society. Now we see the 
ancient wisdom that what really counts is the human spirit, the human 
approach in science, as in everything else. Let us not blame science which 

Address at the 68th annual session of the Indian Science Congress, Varanasi, January 3, 1981 

SELECfED SPEECHES AND WRITINGS OF INDIRA GANDHI 

has unveiled for us some. of the mysteries of our own minds and bodies,· no 
less than the miracles of outer space. Let us blame ourselves as governments 
and citizens for seizing these wondrous opportunities.not to help fellow man 
but to destroy or maim him, not to make up whatever deficiency there might 
be in our earth but to deplete its treasures. For what? For very temporary 
gain, or physical comfort, or goods of which we soon tire, as does a child 
who has a surfeit of toys. The rich out of greed and the poor out of need 
have been reckless in plundering earth's assets. There is now deep anxiety 
about the rapid diminishing of what have become essentials to our way of 
living, indeed even to life. 

In affluent nations, agriculture is based on high energy inputs which we 
simply cannot afford. Agriculture is a harvest of sunshine, a resource which 
we have in plenty. Whereas industry makes allowance for a certain deprecia-
tion of assets, which is not feasible in agriculture'. We have to use land and 
water so as to enhance their productivity. The indiscriminate use of fertilizer, 
pesticides and other agricultural inputs causes long-.term damage to humans 
. and animals, to crops and to the earth itself; 

· · Industry, so 11ecessary for employment an:d for providing needed articles; 
can also be a nuisance. While vast numbers.in the developing countries are 
in desperate need of basic necessities, the affluent countries are using up far 
more than their share. of the world's resources, spending much money, 
material and talent in churning out luxuries, thus inculcating wasteful 
hab'its, although it is now known that resources are limited. Goods and 
weapons soon become obsolete. They clutter the landscape. Either we cannot 
or haven't yet made the effort to recycle them. Factories pollute the air and 
the water, spreading dirt and disease, no less than that caused by poverty. 
Development with conservation means that growth priorities do not 
sacrifice the needs of to1norrow for immediate compulsions. It requires 
closer association of scientists and technologists in the planning proa;ess. 
Planners n1ust call for ecological impact statements to indicate the probable 
long-tern1 effects of·any technological innovation. \Ve have just constituted 
a Department of Environ1nent at the Centre and have suggested to the State 
Governnients to do likewise. We hope that every major developmental 
ministry will have advisers to take care of environmental considerations. 
Our recent legislation ensures that proposals to convert forestry areas 
to non-forestry uses are scrutinised by a Central team of experts. Public 
awakening.about the ecological dimension of development has resulted in an 
in-depth look at the Silent Valley and other projects. We expect the State 
Governments to share our concern and do their utmost not only to preserve 
existing forests but to extend and enrich them and promote socially useful 
schemes like farm forestry and social forestry. 

Poverty and economic backwardness are themselves constraints to 
growth. For rapid progress, we need more sophisticated technology but when 
-· any such change is contemplated, it is bound to disturb some workers and 

temporarily displace industrial labour-although I am assured by people 
in the industrialized countries that such changes are the only way to provide 
.We n1ust ensure a continuous 
greater employment in the long run. 
programme of training so that the hardship is minimised in terms of time 
and earning. 

The real difficulty arises with certain traditional occupations which 
employ large numbers of women in the urban and rural areas. As living 
habits change, they must find new work for which they are ill-equipped. 
Equally serious in 1nore ways than one is the condition of craftsmen and 
artisans because then there is also the question of skills which constitute 
the wealth of our culture, and are living links with our past. They are 
creators of a type of beauty and quality which the machine can never 
reproduce. 

We have about 2.5 million scientists, 120 universities, _5 I.I.T.s, 150 
engineering colleges, 350 polytechnics and 100 rnedical colleges. These add 
-·. about 150,000 qualified scientific and technical personnel every year. To 
· . my dismai, I learn that some 300,000 scient_ists and technologists are un-

employed. Vie must not allow this valuable resource to be wasted. 'Nays . 
must be devised of inducting this talent into new programmes to benefit our 
countryside. We should also organize groups of science students in every 
university who can be invoived in local development, particularly in helping 
farmers and others in energy renewal and organic recycling. h1any could 
later find occupations based on land and water, such as agriculture, horti-
cuiture, animal husbandry, fisheries and forestry, . or small and village 
industries and various aspects of post-harvest technology. Groups of 
educated young people should be enabled to jointly organize rural 
enterprises. The merit of such group self-employment is that di..'Ierent 
members of the group can be trained in specialis.ed but e;omplementary 
aspects of the production-consun1ption chain. 

Our people, be t1l.ey literate or illiterate, have demonstrated their willing-

ness to accept new technology if they are convinced about its economic 
soundness and social benefit I cannot forget how some experts had predicted 
that from 1974 India would starve without the aid of benevolent outsiders. 
That was the year when the co-operation between our farmers and scientists 
increased wheat production. It is now nearly 300 per cent more than in 
1967. However, every forward step in development creates new problems. 
Many of these can be anticipated by scientists and remedies taken to ward 
off or 1ninimise maladies. 

Better-off farmers may be more vociferous but even small and marginal 
farmers and share-croppers have some marketable surplus in areas where 
there has been some development. In interior and hill areas, farmers do not 
get even 15 per cent of the amount paid by the consumer for agricultural 
· products. Tnis is why we need organizations to protect the- interests of 
producers and consumers. Technology.based co-operatives have proved 

successful in many areas where professional skill has blended with people's 
action. The community of scientists and technologists can and must help 
the weaker sections of our population through technology transfer from the 
laboratory to the field and workshop, along with new ideas in marketing. 

A crucial factor in technological development is energy. Other countries 
are experimenting in a big way in the uses of renewable sources. In the 
long run, hydel power, solar and bio-energy will be the principal forms of 
energy used in our country. The tapping of solar energy through three known 
methods, nainely, photosynthesis, photovoltaic systems and photothermal 
applications, can meet our energy needs. We are also using nuclear energy 
for this and other developmental purposes. Immediately, however, we must 
be very thrifty in our use not only of indigenous and imported petroleum 
products but even of coal. We have decided to establish a Commission 
for Alternative Energy to advise us on energy policy and to draw up and 
implement programme~ on alternative sources. This: will give fresh impetus 
.to innovative thinking. 

. Bio-energy, through the extensive use of community bio-gas plants, · 

village wood lots and organic recycling, presents a vast panorama of opportu-
nities in our rui·al areas. We should not under estimate the pivotal role of 
these renewable sources of energy in improving agricultural and industrial 
production as well as generating greater employn1ent. In 1976, here in U.P., 
the State Bank had planned to finance at least one gobar gas plant in every 
village. Such efforts should be revived and get priority. It is important to 
involve the local population th.rough demonstration, education and organiza-
tion. 

The success or failure of any technological innovation depends on 
economic considerations. The main reason for the gap between knowledge 
gathered in our laboratories and their appli~ation by-industry is inadequate 
interaction between technologists and economists. I want closer collaboration 
between sciei;itists and social scientists. Social sciet1tists should be inducted 
into our major applied research laboratories so that the socio-economic 
aspects of technology transfer are attended to concurrently. If laboratories 
and universities assess the applied value of their work on considerations 
of ecology, economics, employment generation and energy conservation, 
they will be more significant in promoting development with conservation. 
In the last few months, we have made strenuous efforts to dispel the 
clouds that had descended on our scientific horizon in the universities and 
national laboratories. I have always attached importance to planning and 
to the purposive use of science and technology as an instrument of develop-
ment. Professor Nurul Hasan and I have held extensive consultations with 
scientists in different organizations all over the country. When it is finally 
adopted, I hope the Sixth Plan will reflect many of the ideas you have put 
forward. We shall continue to meet recognized and established leaders of 
science and also the younger scientists. Some of the most creative ideas in 

SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND ENV:(R.ONMENT 

science come from people in their twenties and thirties. We must attempt 
a quantum jump in basic research and relevance-oriented and application-
directed research and its implementation: Even advanced countries are fast 
realizing 
that any diminution in their basic research will erode their. 
technological lead. 

I have tried to give more precise focus to our programmes and priorities 
in scientific research and to promote greater scientific input into develop1nent 
and involvement of scientists with decision-making. Special attention has 
to be paid to hill, tribal and backward areas. The links between laboratories 
and universities on the one hand and industries and user Ministries on the 
other must be strengthened. To expedite decisions, we are reviving the 
Cabinet Committee on Science and Technology and are appointing a 
Scientific Advisory Committee to the Cabinet. 

The task of communicating techi,ology to the people is of gigantic 
proportions .. Science is now accepted as a decisive economic input, but our 
people as .a whole are yet to develop a scientific temper anci to recognize 
· science as an agent for social transformation and a new way of looking at 
pro bl.ems. 

1980 has witnessed notable accon1plish.'Uents by our scientists. J\l[ay 
I pay special· tribute to our space scientists and the engineers and others 
without whose dedication they could not have functioned? More achieve-
ments await our scientists in space and nuclear science, in energy and the 
utilization of offshore oil resources, in medicine and agriculture. On behalf 
of the Government, I assure you of support in any endeavour you undertake 
to make our country self-reliant and strong. 

Recognition of Scientists 

IT IS NOT yet a year since these awards were presented for 1978 and 1979. 
Such regularity in acknowledging the distinction and endeavour of our 
scientists is more than a tribute to the memory of Dr. Shanti Swarup 
Bhatnagar. It demonstrates the nation's recognition of the sustained and 
comn1itted research work of these brilliant scientists. They serve as reminders 
to scientists and others, striving tirelessly for perfection, that goals are within 
the reach of those who work selflessly for them. But there is no end of the 
journey; all our achievements are steps on the way to the continuous pursuit 

Speech at the presentation ceremony of the Shanti Swamp Bhatnagar Prizes for Science 
and Technology for 1980, New Delhi, April 21, 1981 

of excellence and 
advancement. 

truth,· untainted by considerations of personal 

It may belabouring the obvious, but we must keep in mind that scientific 
endeavour cannot totally be an end in itself. The scientist, who pursues a 
line of inquiry with the concentration and single-mindedness which brings 
him satisfaction, cannot be divorced from moral values or social objectives. 
He has as much a responsibility to ensure that his discoveries, far from 
adding to human suffering, help to alleviate it. I am arguing not for a welfare 
approach in science but an approach which enables science to prosper along 
with mankind. All the fruits of science will be of little avail if its discoveries 
are used only in arming nations and giving power to a few egocentric groups 
seeking dominance over the minds of fellow human beings. 

The Council of Scientific and Industrial Research is fostering latent talent 
also, promoting discoveries arid innovations to the stage where they become 
processes which could aid rural and industrial develonment. If we were 
to judge its work in terms . of results achieved, · particularly since it was 
reactivated in the last year or so, there is no doubt that our faith in our 
scientists is an important investment. Their collective efforts have encouraged 
us to strengthen the base for further development. The painstaking research 
.and development in solar and other forms of renewable energy has led to 
creating a Commission for Additional Sources of Energy which can carry 
this forward for direct benefit to people, particularly in rural areas. We 
are taking more concrete steps to marry the work in oceanography and 
deep-sea living and non-living resources as also in the associated technology 
of their exploitation to the general harnessing of sea resources for develop· 
meut. The new Department of. Ocean Development and the Ocean 
Commission have much to do. VI e hope it will rekindle the spirit of adventure. 
There ace im1nense possibilities in our forests, not only for fuel or 
paper-making but for food and medicine. The development of forests is 
essential not only for our fresh air and climate but also to .Provide an adequate 
livelihood to those who live around them. iviuch work needs to be done 
on our herbs and plants. We should look out for the brilliant developments 
initiated in the different setting of the West but equally necessary is an inward 
gaze towards the exciting prospect of preserving our environment as we find 
it, with the least damage to ecology. We cannot neglect measures which will 
enable us to live in harmony with nature. The new Department of Environ-
ment should draw and build on the work of laboratories. 

Such initiatives and new lines of research effort need a high level of 
dedication and, at the present stage of our econmnic development, some 
sacrifice from our scientific community. There is the lure of material comfort 
and far better working conditions in some other countries. It would be 
churlish to dismiss those who give in to these te1nptations as unpatriotic, 
for their contribution has value for the world community. But we do ad1nire 
more those who give great importance to work in our own country, putting 

up with all the limitations that scarce resources impose on them. They face 
a greater challenge and we salute them and their families. We shall continue 
to do whatever is within our power to add to their comfort but we also 
continue to expect quicker results from their benches. 

For a scientist to take to the desk can be part of a cyclical process, for 
it means temporary extra-responsibilities to project to others the special 
needs of his community. This is welcome but if this becomes an end in itself, 
it becomes harmful. It is said that creativity in science diminishes after the 
age of 40 or 50, but that is no reason for abandoning scientific activity. 
Scientists, particularly senior scientists, should 
inspire younger ones by 
continuing scientific work, by supervising and guiding them and promoting 
a multi-disciplinary approach to our problems. More effective opinion 
leaders from the scientific community have come from among those who have 
demonstrated a continuing aptitude for direct research and collaborative 
. development with scientists in other srecialities • 

. The.Bhatnagar Award function. is a time for introspection and.resolution 
of these and other issues before the scientific community. Its main message 
is that laurels are not to be sought but acquired; they have to be the omnibus 
and not the terminus, an inducement for continuing the journey. 

Save Environment 
IN LIFE, THE environment should not become the·:enerriy 0£ th~ imp~rtant. 
What we do today ought not to prejudice what we might have to do tomor-
. row. But. economic ;man has been guided more by greed than by wisdom. 
He has felled trees, destroyed forests, ripped open the earth, wiped away 
many species of plants and animals, burnt up fuel. He arrogantly regards 
all creation as his slave. 

From the beginning of time, sages have warned human beings not to 
.be rapacious and to look upon all life and even non-life with kindly eyes. 
Only now, when the technology of warfare and economic exploitation has 
becon1e ruthlessly efficient, have a large number of people become suddenly 
aware that life itself might be extinguished and that Nature will not care for 
man unless he caresJor it. Science, which concerned itself preponderantly 
with creation and destruction, is now turning its attention to the other task 
of preservation. ·:'':" ·· ·· 

Message 
December 22, 1980 

to 

the Environment Forum of Members of Parliament, New Delhi, 

Many are the threats to the preservation of our resources. 

I am glad . 
that parliamentarians are taking a lively interest in this problem. The future 
is at our doorstep. We .must endeavour to bequeath to our children and 
grandchildren not a denuded environment but a better and richer India. 

Development and Ecology 
I AM INTERVENlNG with a few thoughts of my own ... I shall start with the 
last speaker. 
I am glad to know that Hon. Member is basically in agreement with 
the proposal that our forests and. our ecology should be protected and 
· conserved. He has also pointed out the dangers of the profit-1naking system 
· and I agree. It is where people are concerned with immediati;: profit that 
they do not hesitate to impose a future burden on society. This is the reason 
for our concern for ecology. We are not and we cannot be against develop-
ment. The whole purpose of our planning and our progran1mes is to improve 
the quality of life of the individual, of Man. As the Hon. Member has 
rightly stressed., we do consider Man the n1ost important. Perhaps, it is 
because we are men and women that gives ourselves this hnportance. I 
do not know whether in the scheme of things we really are or not. 

But how do we preserve Man? This is the question which has cropped 
up now. 
If some ideas come from the developed countries ... we do 
· not say they are entirely disinterested, they may have ulterior motives and 
we should be careful about such mof.ivation .. , but if they have acquired 
experience through their own industrialization, we should learn from them 
to try to avoid the same mistakes. 

Concern with ecology in India, as Hon. Members have pointed out, is 
not a new one. It has been there from time immemorial. It is mentioned in 
our Vedas. It has nothing to do with religion. It is concerned with the 
preservation of Man, with the preservation of conditions on Earth which will 
It is our own fault that we have not been able to 
enable Man to survive. 
line up to this. We find that a number of projects, although they have done 
good and have helped to develop an area, have also had side effects which 
have done a great deal of harm. I am not commenting on any particular 
project. The one that the Hon. Member mentioned is under discussion, . 
as. he knows. But in other places also, certain projects have resulted in 
deforestation which, in time, has caused siltation of rivers, floods and other./\, 

Intervention in the discussion on depletion of nat11ral resources, pol1ution of habitat and·.·· 
upsetting of ecological balance, Lok Sabha, Au.,aust 11, 1980 

such effects which have caused and are causing year after year tremendous 
damage to people. Surely, looking after these problems has nothing to do 
with anybody's advice from outside. The advice we take is on limited matters 
where the research and knowledge is not available to us otherwise .. 

Basically, many of our troubfos today are due to the over-exploitation 
of the soil. This does not mean that fertilizer is bad.' We are for the use of 
fertilizers, but not over-use. We have constantly to draw the line. We are 
trying out the concept ... an idea which has been known in India before, 
though not in modern times. This idea has come from abroad ... of forest 
farming or social forestry, i.e., developing forests in a particular way. An 
Hon. Member referred to the planting of spruce trees, pine trees, which dry 
up the soil. We should have mixed forests with trees which enrich the soil 
and can provide employment and enable the local people to earn a liveli-
hood. Now, we are laying stress on this aspect and we are going to lay 
stress on it in our planning: Already some States, notably Himachal, have 
taken · steps in this direction. 

• Pollution is of two. kinds. We have pollution in India because of our, 
poverty and ~conomic backwardn~ss. But, to· my mind,· it, is in no way 
different from the pollution caused by effluents which result in pollution of 
the air we breathe and pollution of the water we drink and so on. That is 
why vie are trying to subject each development project to environmental 
and socio-economic evaluation. We have crash programmes for afforestation 
and we are trying to plant on the edges of deserts. This has been successfully 
attempted in other c_ountries. 

Dr Karan Singh raised the question of education. It is a very good point. 
Education or rather text-books are still under the purvioc:w of the State 
governments although we have brought education in the Concurrent List. 
We are pursuing this matter. It is important to link ecology with every other 
subject. Correct attitudes must be inculcated in the child from the earliest 
age which affect his approach throughout his life. This is the responsibility 
of Hon. Members and other responsible citizens. Where does· the pressure 
come from? The pressure is n:1ostly from MPs and MLAs. Therefore, all 
of you here, who are interested in the subject, can create an awareness. 
There are reports by some scientists, but other scientists do not always agree 
with them. This happens in all areas .. .in almost every area of national 
activity. 

I should like to pay a tribute to those, especially in U.P., who have 
prevented contractors from cutting down their trees and have mounted a 
movement ... the Chipko Movement. We can create this awareness amongst 
our people everywhere and be on the look out as to what is going on. Some 
decisions regarding projects make it difficult to safeguard particular areas. 
We are determined that we should not repeat such mistakes. We are trying 
to see how we can recover what has been lost earlier. In this, we do need 
the help of those who are interested in the subject. 

There are expert committees and there· 

is one-the National 
Committee on Environmental Planning and Co-ordination-to advise the 
Government. It consists of ecologists, naturalists, environmental specialists 
and heads of concerned administrative Departments of"the Governn1ent. 
Their purpose is to review the existing legislation and administrative 
arrangements at the Central and State levels and to suggest new legislation 
where required and also let us know how best we can conserve and protect 
the environment. This particular committee is going to report next month. 

More important still is how to inculcate this feeling for our Earth. It 
is not just an ideal: it is of practical necessity for the future and specially to 
India because we have found that apart from the conservation of flora and 
fauna, many of these departmental projects do harm to the people even in 
the present. We have to be concerned with the conservation of men and 
women who are.Jiving there ... I feel very strongly on this issue that wherever 
we have any developmental plan, we must look after not only the plant life, 
the forests, the animals but also the human beings of the area. I should 
iike to repeat that som~tinies we try to think that by just havinga big project 
there, we will help human beings. That has always not worked out. 

Balancing Economic Growth and Ecology 

QUESTIO;N : At th~ Stockholm Conference on Human Environment in 1972, 
you saia. that poverty was the greatest "pollution" in 
the developing 
In the last decade, poverty in the developing world has become 
countries. 
worse although there has been considerable indu-strial development, better 
agricultural output and other overall improvements. In view of these, do 
you still hold the same view about environment that you had expressed at the 
Stockholm Conference? 

: That position remains true. Poverty breeds dirt and 
PRIME MINISTER 
disease and. lowers human dignity. 
It imposes intolerable burdens on 
people, especially when they are able to see what is happening around them 
and the irony that mankind today has the economic and technological 
wherewithal to reduce drudgery and raise standards of living. 

I do not asree with the second part of your question. Poverty has not 
become worse. Only the disparities between developed and developing 

Replies to questions by Dr. Mostafa Tolba, Executive Director of the United Nations 
Environment Programme, August 13, 1981 

nations have grown. 
In our own country, for example, we have been able 
to achieve food self-sufficiency and further strengthen the industrial base. 
We have also been able to extend education, health and other services to a 
larger number of people. But the increase in population is a problem and 
with the growth of education and communications, people's impatience has 
increased. The tolerance level has lowered. 

QUESTION : Last year your Government set up a new Ministry of Environ-
ment. This indicates you are according priority now to the environment. 
What prompted you to take the decision to have a separate Ministry to deal 
with the environmental issues? Would you like to comment on the major 
environmental issues in your country? 

PRIME MINISTER : We do attach priority to the environment. We have to 
make our people more alive to the fact that conservation is not something 
extra but essential in the counting of costs-social costs and even basic 
econoniic costs. There are indications now, in movement like the Chipko · 
· one in India, that our people are beginning to· realize this •. · 

.This concept of environmental protection is not new to us. 

Indian . 

taught us 

that all forms of life are closely interlinked. 
tradition has 
Traditionally we have prayed for the welfare not only of all men but of all 
animals and plants and even of the five elen1ents of life-. earth, water, air, 
fire, and space. Following this tradition, the Indian Constitution has made 
specific reference to the need for ecological safeguards, and the environment 
has been recognised as an issue of national concern at the political level. 

A new Department of Environment has been created to focus greater 
attention on these issues, to recommend legislative measures and to develop 
an administrative machinery required for environmental protection in its 
widest sense and in its numerous practical forn1s. A number of organizations, 
which are directly or indirectly concerned with the environment, already exist. 
The Department of Enviromnent will coordinate their work so as to have an 
orchestrated effort to conserve valuatile resources such as forests, soil, water 
and wildlife, while improving basic ll,.menities such as housing, drinking water, 
proper sanitation,· protection from floods and combating drought. The 
environment requires a 1nulti-disciplinary approach. Hence, the need for 
coordination. As ours is a federal polity, we have also advised the States 
to set up Departments of Environment. 

In my Stockholm speech, 

I also pointed out that without effective 
reduction in poverty, we cannot preserve our natural environment. People 
will naturally want their areas to develop. Any ecological argument which 
defers their hopes of higher incomes will be ignored. We have to provide 
viable alternatives and assure them that conservation will be built into the 
development process. The Department will undertake this important task 
of edu~ating the public and of getting projects and programmes assessed 
from the ecological viewpoint even at the pre-sanction stage. 

QUESTION: Last year, under the auspices of UNEP, the South Asian countries 
-India, Pakistan, Afghanistan, Nepal, Bangladesh, Burma and Sri Lan:ka-
had a meeting in Colombo to form the South Asia Cooperative Environ-
mental Programme (SACEP): Since these nations also have a number of 
environmental problems which have political implications-the sharing of 
waters, desertification and so on, would you consider SACEP as the first 
for resolving environmental and 
political differences in the region? 

towards building a mechanism 

PRIME MINISTER : The countries of any given 
region face common 
geographical and economic problems. We have gradually got used to a 
regional approach to health. Advanced countries have also evolved regional 
common markets. This needs a considerable mutual trust. But the history 
of our sub-continent has unfortunately been marked by distrust and 
misunderstanding. 

The sharing .of waters arouses sttortg passions, not only betwe~ri . 

countries but even provinces and States of the saine country .. The matter 
is intensely political and it can be solved only politically, of course, keeping 
techno-econornic factors in mind. As far as India is concerned, we have 
successfully settled many disputes and we have always welcomed bilateral 
negotiations with our neighbouring countries. We are constantly taking 
initiatives. However, it would be unrealistic to expect the Environmental 
Programme to solve such tangled problems as the sharing of river waters. 
The programme can and must pron1ote greater 
trust and co-operation 
among scientists and technologists who in turn can put facts before their 
governments and people. 

that development meant 
QUESTION : A few years ago, it was thought 
'degrading the environment'. UNEP worked on 
the problem and has 
proved that development and environment are complementary and not one 
at the cost of other. This balance can be achieved with environment 
ministries, provided they have enough clout and trained manpower to 
monitor and decide how this could be a reality. Would you care to comment 
on this concept and relate it to how India is tackling this problem? In this 
connection, I would like to refer to the Silent Valley controversy in the State 
of Kerala over the Iduki project. 

PRIME MINISTER : To some extent I have dealt with this question in an earlier 
answer. In India, we have a Planning Commission which goes into all the 
details of our projects. Then there is the National Development Council 
which gives its seal of approval to Plan proposals which are later discussed 
in the State Assemblies and Parliament. You can give clout to this or that 
ministry or agency, but they must all work within the accepted system. 

Over the years, our Planning Commission has done a good job in reconciling 
different interests and points of view. What is comparatively new all over the 
the world is the ecological dimension of economic growth. Elsewhere I have 
described s~me of the situations where development and ecology are 
seemingly in conflict. It is not easy but it is possible to have a balance. 
This is where the Environment Ministry comes in. 
. Each province or region gets emotionally attached to some schemes. 
The Silent Valley is an example. The Government of the State of Kerala 
and the Government of India have handed over the whole question to a 
team of experts to examine in view of the ecological importance of Silent 
Valley. 

QUESTION: India has become, over the years, a highly industrialized country. 
Its food production is reaching the all-time high record this year. Industries, 
unless there are rigid environmental protection laws, pollute and some 
industries like cement, petrochemicals, carbon blacks and iron and steel 
pollute more than others. Would you like to con1ment how India is tackling · 
these industries or plans to do in the future? 

PRIME MINISTER : We have enacted legislation fo1; the prevention and control 
of water and air pollution. 
In accordance with this Act, industries are 
required to obtain the approval and clearance of the Department of 
Environment. We have issued a directive that the cost of anti-pollution 
measures and the recycling of waste should be treated as an integral part 
of project estimates. Further, through the Department of Environment, we 
have laid down a procedure for an environmental impact assessment of all 
such projects which have a bearing on the environmental qu~lity from the 
planning stage onwards. 

No country can do without industries and a developing country's future 
is tied up with technological growth. But every effort must be made to 
minimise pollution. We have just taken remedial steps in the Delhi thermal . 
plants.when project designs had not made adequate provision for this aspect. 
We have just closed down thermal stations in Agra and are trying to move 
foundries to protect the Taj Mahal. 

QUEST~ON : Also, there is the question of food production. India's miracle 
Green Revolution owes its success to its excellent and trained manpower, 
hybrid seeds, controlled irrigation and 
increased fertilizers which are 
petroleum based. With the continued increase in the prices of petroleum, 
the cost of food production is projected to go up by 95 per cent 
that happens the developing countries will be 
by the year 2000. When 
hurt most. Can you give us some idea how India plans to tackle this 
aspect· .. of energy crisis without any drop in her food production as it has · 
been found that withdrawal of energy-intensive fertiliz~rs cuts down food 
production? 

PR~ME MINISTER : I 9annot claim that we have all the answers. But our 
scientists are working hard on the problem. Farming consumes energy in 
two ways : to run pumps and in the form of fertilizers. Gradually it will 
be ,possible to use wind and solar power to drive pumps. We are also 
popularizing green manure and other organic forms of manure. Even water 
hyacinth and residues of biogas plants are being used for this purpose. 
Scientific processing helps to use animal waste as manure more efficiently. 
Recently, we have set up a Commission for Alternative Sources of Energy. 
Genetic engineering may also be of help. 

QUESTION : Madam, as the leader of one of the two most powerful Third 
World nations, we would like to hear your views on : 

(a) economic conditions of the Third World in.the year 2000; 
(b) how will it look environmentally in the nineties; 

if you feel that the ·energy crisis will negate environmental gains; 
. or any other question Her Excellency would like to be_ included . 

. PRIME MINISTER: With due deference tC> futurol~gists; I _do riot believe in this . 
kind of crystal-gazirig. Those who carry political responsibilities inust 
concentrate on measures to keep the future safe for coming generations. 
Some people divide the world into compartments. But I believe in one 
world and am interested in all people improving the quality of their lives 
which by the way does not depend on the extent of their worldly possessions. 
What is the purpose of a high standard of living if it is accompanied by fear 
and anxiety? 
Intellectual and spiritual awakening and emotional balance 
are important ingredients in improving the quality of life . 

Education and Culture 

Darululoom 

that such a 

· I AM GLAD 
large number of eminent scholars and 
governmental representatives of other lands and from different parts of our 
own country have travelled all the way here to participate in this' function. 
This indicates the special place which Darul Uloom occupies in the world of 
Islamic learning. 
I feel privileged to offer it the homage of gratitude and 
admiration of the Government and the people of India. 

The institution itself was the product of the country's national awakening 
and its fight against colonial rulers. In 1857, there was a great uprising in our 
country to expel the imperial power and regain freedom. That upsurge did 
not succeed politically, but out of it was born the cultural renaissance of our 
Indians came to have a strong realization of their Indiaiiness and. 
nation. 
resolved to work for their intellectual and political liberation. There was 
a great efflorescence6f the spirit .. Thinkers, social reformers, poets and 
saints of great eminence and brilliance arose. Many new institutions were 
established. Darul Uloom was one of them and its scholars made a name 
for themselves all over the Islamic world. The Indian National Congress 
was another. Darul Uloom retained close 
links with our quest for 
independence under Mahatma Gandhi and contributed to our national 
rebirth. It is through the individual and combined efforts of all these great 
personalities and institutions that India finally regained freedom in 1947. 
This year, the Islamic Hijri Era completes 1400 years. It is an occasion to 
look back at the entire panorama of Islam and the contribution it has made to 
the growth of the human spirit and· the spread of the idea of equality and 
brotherhood. Many of the world's great religions were born in India-
Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism anq Sikhism. Others, like Zoroastrianism, 
Christianity and Islam came to us from neighbouring'countries. But we 
have never regarded them as outside religions. We consider Islam very 
much a religion of India. Ove:r60 million of our people profess and practise 
it. Others hold it in the highest respect. 

We are proud that the special genius of the Indian tradition and the 
modern Indian nation which we have built and are consolidating is to accord 
equal honour and respect to all religions. Twenty-two centuries ago, the 
great Indian Emperor Ashoka said that he who does not honour another 
It is only such an outlook 
man's religion cannot truly honour his own. 
of tolerance 
that can ensure peace in the troubled world of our 
times . 

Free translation of speech in Urdu at the centenary celebrations of Darul Uloom, Deoband, 
Uttar Pradesh, March 21, 1980 

Islamic thought and the cultures, that the various groups of Islamic 
people brought with them when they came to our country, have gone into 
the strengthening of India. We have found that diversity can be and is a 
great source of strength just as an alloy is stronger than the elements which 
go into its making. 

When different groups of people or. different strands of thought come 
together, sometimes there is conflict but often there is creative interaction. 
Islamic thought has interacted with earlier Indian thought and led to many 
new ideas. The songs and psalms of the great Ivluslim poets have been 
accepted by the Indian people as their own and have found their way into 
everyday speech. Over several centuries, some of the greatest scholars, 
artists and craftsmen from other parts of the Islan1ic world have either made 
India their home or spent long years here. 1v1any of them have left their 
imprint on our life and even on our landscape. 
I take this opportunity to 
salute this vital component of the many-splendoured fabric that is Indian 
culture. 
. Once again,. Off. behalf .. of the people of India, I greet this premier 
institution on its centenary. I hope that it will continue to serve India and 
the Islamic world wi:th distinction. 

Teachers' Day 

IN EVERY COUNTRY, education 
growing at a breath-taking rate. 
of any nation or any class of people. At the same time, many educational ~ 
institutions continue to _propagate narrow feelings of province, caste and 
religion. 

is at 
the crossroads. Knowledge is 
Information is no longer the 1nonopoly 

Which road shall we take? Obviously, the one that liberates mind and 
the one which 

inspires faith in ourselves and confidence in the future: 
strengthens the nation and makes it self-reliant. 

To this task, teachers have a vital contribution to make. Not all 
additions to educational technology will ever n1ake teachers obsolete. 
shall continue to depend on them to enlarge the personality of yot/ng people. 
On Teachers' Day let us honour the men and women who are engaged in 
the noble calling of education. 

Message to the nation, September 4, 1980 

The Meaning of Education 
I CONGRATULATE THE Scottish Church College on its 150th birthday. 
This College has made creative contribution to Calcutta, to Bengal and to 
our country. 

I am glad to be here to participate in your celebrations. 

Four centuries ago, Martin Luther, the trail-blazer of Protestantism, 
described the prosperity of a country as depending not on the abundance 
of its revenue, not the strength of its fortifications, not the beauty of its 
public buildings, but on the persons of quality whom it produces. The 
greatness of Bengal is that it has produced so many 1nen and women of 
. education, enlightenment and character. The Principal has just narrated 
the names of some of the great alumni of this College. Any institution that 
shared in the moulding of Vivekananda or Netaji Bose can be justly proud 

. and commands the nation's gratitude. "Did you once see Shelley plain?'', . 
Browning was asked. That question can be addressed to these corridors · 
about the legendary men who have learnt and taught here and left their 
signatures on the spirit of our people. 

The College is a living link with Raja Rammohun Roy who befriended, 
encouraged and supported its illustrious founder, Alexander Duff. Those 
were the days when a great debate raged between classical and modern 
education. Rammohun Roy did not scorn the classics but he was on the 
side of the moderns. He recognized the need for India and her young 
people to acquire and use the latest in knowledge and to feel at home in the 
:e_:ilms""fhat were daily addedto sdence. 
'To know' is to be free. Education 
is not a converse with the past; it is an assignation with the future. 

The people of Europe came Qut to India primarily for riches, followed 
quickly by the desire to rule. But some came to spread their faith. Among 
the pioneers were dedicated scholars and teachers who, travelling thousands 
of n1iles from their homes, stimulated and satisfied the thirst for new 
knowledge in the India of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. 
They discovered our books and printed then1 in large numbers, learnt and 
enriched our languages. 
In the minds of our young they implanted images 
of new worlds to conquer. Would our culture be what it is today without a 
\Villiam Carey or a William Jones? Early this year we celebrated the 
bicentenary of the publication of Hickey's Gazette from this city. A small, 
cantankerous man, _Hickey's aim was to harass Warren Hastings-but he 
bequeathed a great institution to us : the Press. 

Address at the 150th anniversary celebrations of the Scottish Church College, Calcutta, 
September 27, 1980 

In the battle between old and new learning, the new won out. As is 
well known, our present educational system emerged from Macaulay's 
I do not wish to attempt a critique of a document that has come in 
minute. 
for 1nuch chastisement. But in one sense Macaulay fulfilled his prophecy, 
for the system of education he introduced itself became a major instrument 
to end British power in India. But it also entrenched a dichotomy between 
knowledge and culture which we have not yet been able to remedy. 
In spite of the many felt inadequacies of our educational system, it has 
acted as a leaven of political consciousness and deliverance from the stifling 
old social stratification. It was a scholar of this College, Swami Vivekananda, 
who proclaimed in impassioned words : "We must have life-building, man-
making, character-making education". But this and the education of the 
masses remain a dream. Teachers have been Presidents of our Republic 
and successive governments have grappled with educational reform, but the 
. system has not moved out of the rut and is still way behind our cultural or 
developmental needs. Our creative, intellectual output is far less than wha:t · 
our 650 n1illion people are capable of. 

The first concern of· students is employment. This is natural. But 
earning is merely one of the end products of learning. Only countries with 
very small populations are not plagued with worrisome unemployment. 
do not blame the young; for their anxiety is genuine and their dilemma is a 
reflection of the alienation of our education from personal and national 
proble1ns and the crisis of our times. This lack of correlation is not peculiar 
to India. Few countries are satisfied with their · education. 
\Ve see 
thousands of young people from the affluent countries who opt out of the 
race and wander the globe with emptiness in their hearts. Their troubled 
faces are a commentary on the spiritual vacuousness of the material~affluence 
which our own people now seem so avidly to seek. 

There are countries where the economic or socio-political organisation 
is so entrenched that·the individual feels powerless. In others, he resigns 
himself to a private life of getting and spending, consuming and dreaming, 
unconcerned with how others live. 

In a society like ours, where government is not all-pervasive or all-

providing and where economic institutions are not too vast, life affords 
opportunities for action by individuals. With all its frustrations, 
life in 
India provides limitless challenges for those who can dare and act. People 
come from afar to our Himalayas in search of adventure. For us, the 
adventure lies in our very door-step. 

The present rate of growth of knowledge, the impermanence and growing 
obsolescence of institutions and ideologies and the unassuaged hunger of 
humanity for meaning, for fulfilment, for love and for beauty, puts a constant 
pressure on the process of acquisition of information and of emotional and 
hnaginative maturity that we call education. No college, howsoever good, 
can educate an individual; he educates himself. And the man who is truly 

alive never stops growing and learning. He, who may be called upon to 
teach or to exercise responsibility on behalf of the nation, must look out for 
the ·young men and women who carry a lamp within themselves. We have to 
help the young not to be caged within institutions. 

How is life enhanced? A beautiful passage from Gurudev Tagore 
comes to mind. At the end of his essay, 'To Teachers', he says : "There will 
be a sunrise of truth and love through people who have suffered martyrdom 
for humanity, like the great personality who had only a handful of disciples 
from among the fisherfolk and who, at the end of his career, seemingly 
presented a picture of failure when Rome was at the zenith of her glory. He 
was reviled by those in power, ignored by the crowd, and he was crucified, 
yet through that he lives for ever". 

The inspiration of that man brought the founders of this institution to 
our shores. They had an immediate evangelical motive. But their reach 
was farther than their aim. This is true of all good work. The present-day 
communal and casteist confrontations call for a constant effort to incuicate 
attitudes of tolerance and restraint: 

Bengal, as any part of India, does have .many problems. Perhaps, 
because it has more talent, it has more problems. And this is true even of 
persons. People who are more talented, who are more brilliant, will not 
have fewer problems than others. Therefore, do not be afraid of problems. 
But as Gurudev said : "Let us pray to be able to meet challenges". 

I should like to add something else as one who has been able to solve 
I am deeply aware that every solution creates a new 
some problems. 
problem. There is just no end to problems; but, if we keep ourselves alive, 
if we keep that impassioned spirit that Swami Vivekananda arrd so 1nany of 
our great people symbolized, if we are not discouraged, no matter what the 
difficulty is, we shall prevail. 

Never in our lifetime have there been so many difficulties, nationally or 
inten1ationally, never so many crises. 
I have had the opportunity in the last· 
few months of meeting the leaders of most of the nations of the world. 
Although they were concerned at certain international problems, most of 
them were preoccupied with their own national, economic and other 
problems-with unemployment, with what sort of future they had for the 
people of their own land, and so on. In India, too, we have many difficulties, 
many dangers, many shortages. Fortunately, we do not have a shortage of 
people, of talented people. Let us be prepared to use their talent to the best 
advantage so that they can make use of the opportunity to lead the country 
to great heights. 

On the nation's behalf, I pay homage to the old teachers and students of 
the Scottish Church College and give it my good wishes. May it continue 
its good work and give us leaders and worthy students. To the young 
people, I say, have courage, dare and act. 

Literature and Culture 
IT IS INDEED a pleasure for me to be here amongst you. But I have a 
grievance. You have spoken of the nectar of the sound of Tamil but you 
have given us little occasion to listen to it just now. 

I have tremendous respect for all the w,nguages of India, and Tamil 
occupies a very high place. All of you are aware, it is one of our very oldest 
languages, one with a known and beautiful literature. All of you here have 
quoted Shri Subramanya Bharati which is a name known not only in- India 
but anywhere in the world where people respect good writing. 
I am told 
and I an1 happy to learn that modern Tamil writing is also of a high 
quality-fine, powerful and modern in its expression. 

It is a little difficult to give my views on lit~niture when I ani in the midst 

of literary people. The pen; indeed, is said to be mightier than the sword · 
and I would like to remind you of an old, old story. 
I think it refers to a 
Roman emperor who asked somebody who was with him : What is the best 
thing in the world? And he said, "Words, language". What is the worst 
thing? He said, "Words and language". So, it is not what a thing is, but 
how you use it that matters. 

Words have inspired people to the loftiest of endeavours and the 
greatest of sacrifices. And yet words have also encouraged violence, crime 
and many of the bad things in our world. Words or rather the pen has been 
bought by 1noney, has been conquered by the sword, and has been subjected 
to patronage. That is why I am a little wary of the suggestion that you made 
about government trying to control part of it. Once you say 'control', it is 
very difficult to know what to control and what not to control. And if it is 
in the hands of people who are themselves not very sensitive to·these things, 
they may well control the wrong thing as, I am sorry to say, we sometimes 
see in some spheres of our life here. 
I won't mention which sphere. 
Perhaps you can guess. 

Our country is poor in many ways but it has never been poor in spirit. 
It has a 'yVealth of culture. 
It has richness in the sages we have produced, 
in the great men and women of literature, of religion, of science, of the arts. 
But it is true that in today's India we do fi.nd a slide from son1e of this. This 
It is something that is coming up from below all 
is not peculiar to India. 
over the world; specially just now, it seems to be a western fashion to 
concentrate on what is sensational rather than genuine or beautiful. Many 
of the things which we have valued for centuries have been discarded or 
have been regarded in such a sup_erficial W'B:Y as to neglect their real meaning. 

Speech at the All-India Tamil Writers' Conference, Madras, September 30, 1980 

I am not worried that words can express bad things, because I feel that 
a nation which has culture and character can deal with that _aspect and can 
reject it as all of us reject in life the dirt and the dust and preserve the 
beautiful ornaments of our homes. But today the malady seems a little 
deeper. 

There is a genuine crisis of the spirit, a crisis of civilization. When the 
powerful nations set themselves up as an example to us, and dictate the 
fashion, it is not going to be easy. for our young people to keep their 
feet on Indian soil, 
thought, values 
and ideals. 

to keep their roots in Indian 

I an1 not a traditionalist by nature. 

I do think that we have to move 
along with the times. We have to adapt to many things. At the same time, 
if a nation or a person loses roots then you've just nowhere to go. And this 
is what is happening in many countries ofthe West. This is why many young 
people from there come with emptiness in their hearts to our soil in search of 
something. They do not know \vhat they are seeking. · I do not know if 
they will find it: But the very fact that they are making this search is a .· · 
comment on their own civilizatio.n; or rather the neglect of civilization in 
their countries. 
It is for the writer himself to decide what he should tell us. He may 
open up new worlds to us or he may even just discover hin1self, and so help 
us to discover ourselves. We want men and women who are capable of 
judging what is good and bad. The government cannot judge it for them. 
As Swan1i Vivekananda and many of our great people have said, 
a person educates himself. Neither a teacher nor an institution can do it 
for hiin. The written word can only bring out what we have in ourselves. 
If we do not possess that quality; the most beautiful literature in the world is 
not going to give it to us. 

So, we have to see that we create young men and women, young boys 
and girls of character, of ability and courage who will think before accepting 
or rejecting anything. Sometimes, when everybody is acclaiming something, 
as happens when there is a wave of fashion, it is not easy to stand up and say, 
"No, I don't think it is right". But this is the sort of people we would like 
to build in this country so that they can take what is good 
in their own 
civilization and culture and discard what is superstitious, what has crept in 
by the way. Usually, such things do not last. But if they are there, we 
should have the courage to sweep them away. Similarly, we should not 
think that everything new is gold. There also we have to select what is gold, 
what is good, or sweep away what is merely glittering but is dross. 

I have said a great deal that I had not meant to say. Tamil is not only 
an Indian language, it is now an international language and many people in 
J\1alaysia, in Singapore, in Sri Lanka, speak it. Perhaps you have branches 
of your Association -there which are helping Tamil to grow and flourish 
in every way, and also enabling Indians, who are abroad, to project 

a correct picture of India, not only with our difficulties but also with our 
achievements. 

There is no time without difficulty or crisis. Yet India's great quality 
has been her ability to conquer these difficulties. Let us look to the positive 
side of our country and our achievements so that the younger generation can 
look to the future with hope and confidence. 
I wish your Association all 
success. 

Islam in India 
. I FEEL IT a great . privilege to release this stamp, which we .are issuing 
to commemorate the completion of 1400 yei:\rS ofHijra, the Islamic Calendat, 
and the beginning of the 15th.century of the Islamic Era, . I am specially glad ·· 
that the representatives of so many .countries are present with us on this 
occasion. 

It is an occasion of high significance not only to the millions of Muslims 
in our land but to people all over the world, for it marks a milestone in the 
annals of a very great religion which has made a profound impact on man 
and his civilization. 

The teaching of the Prophet Mohammad had an instant and revolution-

ary appeal because of its democratic feeling and its message of equality and 
brotherhood, of self-help and peace. Human history has few parallels to the 
rapid advance which Islam made in its first years. 

We, in India, celebrate this anniversary with grateful awareness of the 
rich and varied contribution that Islam has made to the evolution of our 
own composite civilization. It is a matter of pride for'Us that apart from the 
great religions that were born in India, other major religions of the world 
have also found a home here. 

Islam for us is an Indian religion. Because of a wholly erroneous 
division of history which has been popularised by some writers in the last 
few decades, some of our people tend to equate the advent of Islam in India 
with the coming of Muslim rulers. In reality, the message of Islam 
permeated parts of our sub-continent long before Muslim rulers governed 
our country, just as Christianity came to us centuries earlier than the armies 
of Europe. Whatever kingdoms arose under Muslim dynasties were 
Indian kingdoms and empires and a part of the rich and diverse fabric of 
In fact, we can say that it were these kingdoms, 
Indian life and culture. 

Speech at the release of a postage stamp to commemorate the completion of 1401) years 
of Hijra, the Islamic calendar, New Delhi, November 3, 1980 

these enlightened rulers, who had a large part to play in the weaving of this 
fabric. 

The influence of Islamic saints and divines was much more responsible 
for the spread of their faith in India than the political power of the rulers. 
Saints like Nizamuddin Aulia, Khwaja Moinuddin Chishti and Baba Farid 
had profound influence on leaders of thought in their days and also on the 
common people. The manner in which Guru Nanak praises them brings 
this home to us more clearly. The contribution of Islam in the fields of 
mathematics, astronomy, medicine, architecture, music and our handicrafts 
is well known. 

In fact, but for this contribution, India would not be what it is today. 
Therefore, it is in the fitness of things that we celebrate this 1400 anniversary 
of the Hijra of the Prophet from Mecca to Medina, from which beginning 
this great religion fanned out to different parts of the world. 

I take this opportunity to convey my felicitations to people all over the 
\Vorld who are celebrating this occa'sion. The stamp· that I have just released 
· shotild be regarded as a symbol and token of the kinship and goodwill that 
exist among all sections of our people. It will serve as an inspiration to us 
to fight against those who want to sow dissensions in the large family that is 
India, and ali those tendencies which create distress and suspicion. 

There will be many more functions during the yeat to celebrate the 
event. Our National Museum is arranging a special exhibition on Islam in 
India. To all these activities, I wish success and I take this occasion specially 
to give my good wishes to the people of India and especially to our Musli_m 
brotherhood. 

Role of Sahitya Akademies 
IT IS INDEED a pleasure to have this opportunity of meeting the authors, 

some of them from Kerala. As we all know, Kerala leads India in 
literacy. Only Chandigarh, Delhi and Mizoram challenge its supremacy in 
this respect. This beautiful State is endowed with many natural resources. 
But there is no doubt that intelligent and educated people are its greatest 
resource. In spite of its high density of population and unfavourable land-
man ratio, because of its high rate of literacy and emphasis on education, the 
State is able to lead this country in many respects, for example, rural health 
and family planning. 

- · Inaugural speech at the silver jubilee celebrations of the Kerala Sahitya Akademi, 

Trivandrum, November 10, 1980 

Literacy is important, for it enables a person to be more independent and 
to widen his horizons, his acquaintance of persons, of ideas and places. 
However, mere literacy is not a sign of education or culture. In spite of low 
literacy, many of our people, because of their oral literature, recite epics, and 
people's art forms like your own Kathakali in Kerala and the Jatra in 
Bengal have become vehicles of a living culture. This cultural literacy is a 
source of strength and susceptibility in society. 

With high literacy, the demand for reading material grows and it is sad 
to· say that in many countries a great deal of trash is produced. Everyone 
who writes is not a writer, nor is every book that is produced literature. The 
imponderable in any 
relationship between quantity and quality is 
investigation of values. Only when many persons work for a cause and there 
is a compulsion in them to give of their very best and even stretch out 
beyond, that quality can emerge. · As in atomic energy, there is a critical 
mass. to set in motion, there is a chain reaction in literature. Criticism is 
essential to high standards_ of creation and that leaves a sample large enough 
for comparison. · Yet; criticism cari often be biased. A writer should not 
write ,vith a view to pleasing the critics but to be true to himself and his 
own experience both as an individual and as a member of the larger society. 

In socialist countries, official agencies -release classics as well as records 
In our country, there is 
of classical music at comparatively low prices. 
great need for organizations which make available and popularise books of 
quality. 

The purpose of the academies is threefold : to encourage the production 
of good books, to ensure that the best books of one language are known in 
other parts of our country, and to honour quality and achievement. 
Translation is also important. But literary work calls not just for knowledge 
of the other language but a high degree of sensitivity a~ well as knowledge 
of t:qe subjects and the circumstances. A useful programme is the exchange 
of teachers-such as in s'ome Western countries, they have the sabbatical, 
people going from one country to another for a whole year. Here, if we 
could do it from one State to another, I think it would help in not only in 
integration but greater appreciation of the culture, the literature and the arts 
of other States. I do agree with you that co-operation and co-ordination 
between the various literary and cultural institutions in the country are 
essential and everything possible should be done to encourage them. 
welcome this compilation which you have made. From the description given 
of it, it seems to be a roost useful addition to some other such publications 
which have appeared. I think this seems to be a more comprehensive one. 

About the government help (that you have asked for), I do not know 
what the rules are. At this moment, many States have State Akademies, 
and I do not know exactly what the relationship is between them and the 
Central Akademies. But government help, I think, 
is a mixed blessing. 
There is always the danger of the line between help and interference being 

little bit blurred. 

Frequent discussion of such encouragement, 
governmental encouragement to authors, is heard. Recently, my attention 
was drawn to a remark of Napolean. You may have heard of it. He is 
reported to have said : "I hear we have no poets in France. What is the 
Minister for the Interior doing about it?" As Dr. Radhakrishnan said when 
the Central Sahitya Akademi was inaugurated, "No Government can n1ake 
It may subsidise versifiers. This is where the Akadetnies 
poets to order. 
come in. They are the custodians of the wealth of a language and that 
wealth is a growing wealth". 
I am sure that your Akademi here is doing 
just this task in Kerala and now it seems to have spread out in other States 
as well through its work. 

I congratulate the Kerala Sahitya Akademi on its silver jubilee, and l 
trust that the authors ofKerala will not only strive constantly to improve the 
people's taste and to widen the mental horizons of the public, but also attract 
the attention of the rest of India and indeed the rest. of the world. I give you 
my good wishes for your future worJc and I have great pleasure in unveiling 
this plaque which signifies the silver jubilee, 

Literature nurtures Understanding 
To ATTEND A non-political function is by itself a pleasure and relaxation, 
although it is said that there is no activity which is not to some extent 
permeated by politics. 
It is a special pleasure to participate in honouring a 
distinguished writer. 

I congratulate Shri Bhattacharya. 

All literature, as all art, is part of om~ national ·wealth. So, although 
Shri Birendra Kumar Bhattacharya lives in-Assam and writes in Assainese, 
we regard him as an Indian author and we thank him for.having added to the 
richness of our lives. 

There is a French saying that each person creates without knowing it. 
In some, this creative genius develops and emerges out of the depth of 
man's being, in words or in colour or in sound. The artist creates 
consciously. 

What is life but a series of experiences. True literature has no dividing 
walls or boundaries. It is one va~t territory which invites us to share the 
more sensitively felt experiences of artists. We 
are honouring 
. Shri Bhattacharya as a person who has opened a new vista and added to 
our understanding of this vast region of experience. It is an unending area, 

Speech at the function held to give away the Jnanpith Award to Shri Birendra Kumar 
Bhattacharya, New Delhi, December 13, 1980 

one that can never be fully discovered or conquered or even described. Each 
new writer is a revelation. Poetry, novels and plays will continue to be 
written and authors' pens will ever be busy and prolific. 

In our country and in many others, literary resurgence has gone hand in 
hand with the national renaissance which arose out of our fight for freedom, 
our search for our own roots and our yearning to reveal and elucidate our 
own identity. Authors have contributed powerfully to the spread of national 
consciousness and to the feeling of oneness in our nation. Great 1nen of 
letters in every language and every region have enabled our people to 
recognize their own inner strength. They have reiterated ancient ideals and 
pointed out the new values that are suited to our times and our tasks. 
Indeed, this became not only a part of, but actually a source of strength to 
our freedom movement, and it was on this basis that linguistic States came 
. into being. This helped us to develop our regional languages. 

There is no conflict between love of State or region and loyalty to the 
. nation. India has proved that the two go together just as a strong .sense of 
. national pride in no way ·1nitigates from the larger love of hun1anity and .. 
concern for international problems. 

If I may inject a personal note : when my sons were very small, every 
morning on awakening they made a habit of clin1bing on to my bed and lying 
on either side of me. At that hour they were concerned with two problems. 
One was that if a mother had more than two children, where would the 
others lie, and, secondly, would there be less love for each succeeding child? 
My answer was that love did hot diminish but kept on growing so that no 
matter how many children one bad, there was always enough love to go 
around. 

Love of one's own State.should not mean antagonism or lack of concern 
for other States. It is unfortunate thaf people do deviate frorn this in our as 
well as other countries. We have had too many inter-State bickerings and I 
would be lacking in candour if I did not say that in their zeal some auJhors 
seem to add to this. 

I am not suggesting any code for writers. Time and again there has 
been a demand for a particular book to be banned. But, except in cases 
where such writings might cause serious offence to a group of people leading 
to riots and even deaths, I am opposed to such bans. Authors 1nust be free 
to write what their urges, their vision and their conscience dictate. But, as 
persons who have the power to influence others, they also have responsibi-
lities. And they lay themselves open to judgements by others as to whether 
or not they are using their power fairly. 

Prejudice is mostly the result of lack of acquaintance with people, 
trends and wider issues. Through greater acquaintance we gain deeper 
comprehension and balance. Systematic efforts must be made to enable 
people of one region to understand the achieven1ents and difficulties of those 

their 

of other regions as also of other countries. When I went, I think, perhaps 
for the first time to Nagaland to set up some social welfare centre, the old 
Nagas were anxious that their culture, 
living should not be 
disturbed and I assured them that that was the policy of the Government 
of India, although at that time I was not a member of the Government. 
Later on, the younger Nagas came and accused me. They said : "You want 
to go ahead. You want to keep us as museum pieces". So, this brought 
very vividly before me the clash between the generations, whether it is in 
Nagaland or anywhere else. Of course, learning more languages is a help 
to know the people. When books of high quality appear in one language, 
people of other areas feel induced to learn that language in order to read 
them at first hand. Translations are essential but cannot always capture the 
original flavour. Awards are also helping this process of inter-cultural 
understanding. 

Cynics and spoil-sports speak slightingly of awards. But even men who 
are aware of their own worth and achievement-authors, artists, musicians, 
scientists, doctors and so on-· are pleased to be recognised and honoured. 
In. fact, an award 
to its benefactors and vicariously shares their achieven1ents. When a 
Rabindranath Tagore or a Satyajit Ray is honoured, the whole of India 
feels elated. Similarly, Jnanpith Awards give pleasure and pride not only 
to the authors but to their own large circles of readers. Literature 
is a kinship. 

is one ·way in which society_ acknowledges its debt · 

Choosing recipients of awards is not easy. Countless articles have 
been ·written on the great writers of our century who have been ignored by 
the Nobel Prize for Literature-Tolstoy, Ibsen, Hardy, James Joyce, for 
exa1nple. And this is even more true of some of the other prizes, notably 
the one for Peace which has now been so politicised. Recently, a British 
journalist me·; me1nbers of the small committee of the Swedish Academy 
which, under.Alfred Nobel's will, gives the Literature award. One of them 
argued that Asia and Africa had received very few _prizes because their 
literatures were yet primitive. See, how the old colonial narrowness of mind 
persists! But it is specially sad and shocking that it should do so in such 
so-called civilized and sophisticated quarters. However, let us not get worked 
up about such verdicts. The world is the poorer for ignoring the writers of 
our continent. But this is part of a much wider problem of global dimension. 
The other day a foreign visitor remarked of someone: "He reported what he 
understood". What a telling phrase and how aptly it describes the problem of 
any reportage! How can the eyes of a person of limited sight see the far 
horizon or a small mind recognize true greatness. Expanding knowledge 
cannot benefit 
the world without a corresponding nurturing of 
understanding and enrichment of the area of awareness. But even when 
committees are not so opinionated, 
it is not always possible to honour 
everyone who merits it. ~How much can we read? 

In India, we have many languages. The number of people who know 
more than one or two languages, besides their own, is limited. But thanks 
to AIR, the Sahitya Akademi, the National Book Trust and the better 
journals, tbe work of outstanding people of one region is beginning to be 
more. widely known in others. The Jnanpith has evolved a procedure by 
which the jury is representative as well as eminent and is doing a very 
c·ommendable work. 

It has been my privilege to know many of the Jnanpith Award winners 
and to have read the works of a few of them. I n1ust confess, and I am 
sorry, that I have not read Shri Bhattacharya's books. But I have read about 
his deep earnestness and humanis1n which has captured the spirit of our 
people, the consciousness which gave birth to the freedom movement and 
the emotions which set aflame their hearts and their minds. 

Tlie fact that he hails from Assam gives me an opportunity to recall 
my own affection for Assam. How impressive is the sweeping n1ajesty of 
the Brahmaputral The sinuousness of Assamese dances, the lilt of Bihu 
songs and the muted luminosity of the silks of the region are things of beauty. 
I have a partiality for the designs used ili old mekh!as and chaddars of the -
last generation. Today's taste is for the easier weave. 

This is no occasion to speak of politics. But for the last few months 
the people of Assam have gone through pain and turbulence of spirit. It 
is my fervent hope that Assan1 will regain calm and harmony. When 
problems are seen in the wider perspective and when there is a spirit of give 
and take, solutions can be found in which all sides gain and none loses. 
Each region must enrich its own personality and take pride 

in its 
heritage and achievement, but not at the cost of others. This attitude of 
equal respect and mutuality is a basic feature of the Indian mind and of 
our Constitution. From it arise the postulates of secularism and non-align-
m~nt in our national and international policies. 
India can survive and 
flourish only on the foundation of tolerance. This is equally true of the 
contemporary world. We look to literature to enlarge tolerance and 
sensitivity and to enhance our reverence for life. 

Values and Human Problems 
IN THE FAMOUS letters which my father wrote to me from prison· when 
I was a young girl, he recounted the story of the man who thought he had 
so much wisdom (and it was located in his stomach) that he had to tie iron 
bands to prevant its bursting out. My father said that there was no danger 
of this happening to hin1. With me it is even less so. Therefore, I have not 
come to give advice to this distinguished gathering but mereiy to share some 
. thoughts. 

To the majority of people, value is still associated with wealth. I presume 
. that here, in this Seminar, we are concerned with the value of man and his 
integrity. Goldsmith wrote : 

"Ill fares the land, to hastening ills a prey; 
\Vhere wealth accumulates and men decay ... 

There cannot be two sets of values. Politics is part of life. In the old 
Greek sense of the word, politics is the essence of life, for it permeates all 
activities. Unfortunately, present-day politicians have made it superficial 
as if it were merely a profession. Values in political or professional life 
cannot be fragmented from those perennial values which are necessary for 
the unfolding of man's personality. To treat political values as separate and 
independent of human values is to diminish the human din1ension. Politics 
will destroy itself unless it discovers new grounds of behaviour and action. 

Today, entirely new factors are iru:1uencing our lives. The unprecedented 
affluence of many countries, the obvious inadequacy of known systems of 
government, whether capitalist, c01nmunist or even 
the many hues of 
socialist .systems as they are practised in different countries, have created 
waves of restlessness 
in· all continents. There is an atmosphere of 
uncertainty, and with loss of faith, man is feeling anchorless. This 
uncertainty has led him to seek sensations and he has got caught up in a 
swirl of violence which creates callousness, drifting into an attitude of 
accepting of even the monstrous. 

The rapid advancement of science and technology has given man 
enormous power. And since other aspects of his personality have not made 
commensurate growth, he has not been able to cope with the consequences-
the overcrowded cities, the shrinking of distances, the outburst of political 
consciousness and tremendous rise in expectations triggered off by the 
evidence of the fruits of technological change; these have led to the decline 

Inaugural speech at a seminar on Value Orientation in Human Problem-solving, organized 
by the Vivekananda Nidhi, Calcutta, January 3, 1981 

SELE(.,'TED SPEECHES AND WRIT~NGS OF INDIRA GANDHI 

of the power of organizations such as the State, organized religion and 
family, and have shown up 
the inadequacy of various political "isms" 
and creeds 

In the affluent countrjes, for the first time man became free from the· 
need to struggle for survival. It was a marvellous opportunity to look into 
himself, to develop his spirituality. The times called for new thinking, the 
discarding of old shibboleths and narrowness. 

But n1an has allowed the opportunity to slip away. His mind has 
been too full of his own pettiness, his hands occupied with grabbing what 
he could. Suddenly there is a reckoning. Society seems to be faced with 
the destruction of man at all levels. Resources are diminishing. Then 
there is the knowledge, occasionally overtly felt, but all the tin1e subliminal, 
that the horrifying stocks of nuclear weapons can wipe away millions of 
people, if not whole nations, in some fell moment. . Chemical or biological 
warfare are just as dreadful. 

Pressures and tensions are destroying mature relationships and culture 
patterns which evolved. over. centuries. This n1eans a gtadual eroding of 
a value system.that was integral to our country's ethos.: 
For many, the focus is shifting from the national to theinternational, 

even, I should say, from earth to the cosmos. 

Swamiji* has put it so well when he talked of a religion which not 
only comforts the troubled but troubles those ,vho live in comfort. My 
father was not a religious man in the accepted sense of the word. But 
he was a man with faith. 
\Vhen he plunged into the nationalist movement 
and travelled extensively in the rural areas of U.P., he was haunted by the 
faces of the village people. "Looking at them and their misery and 
overflowing gratitude, I was filled with shame and sorrow, shame at my 
own easy-going and con1fortable life and our petty politics of the city which 
ignored this vast multitude, and sorrow at the degradation and overwhelming 
poverty of India." This darshan of India drove my father to incessant, 
untiring work and· generated his inexhaustible energy. 

At the core of every ideal there hides a demon of self-centredness. 
That is how revolutions have degenerated into tyrannies. It is said that an 
ideal calls people to the better life whereas an ideal that is institutionalised 
ordains the better life. 

Any search for values will have to find a right balance between personal 
freedom and social obligation. The precise proportion changes depending 
on the given phase in the history of each individual and each people. The 
multitude can be wrong and it may try to snuff out the flame. The individual 
can also be wrong and, in defining truth and value subjectively, he may be 
deluding himself or disowning what he owes to others. Camus said : "To 
live itself is a value judgement. To breathe is to judge." 

*Swami Yuktananda, organizer of the seminar. 

EDUCATION. AND CULTURE 

When l\1ao preached his theory of a new man, countless young people 
all over the world were thrilled, and yet, such a very short time afterwards, 
there is complete disillusionment. Man is distorted by value judgements 
which are born of prejudice and conditioned responses. The search for 
values should not be thought of as a search for a political doctrine or a 
religious creed-for no political or religious credo can provide all the answers. 
Rather it must be a combination of intellectual inquisitiveness and integrity, 
emotional responsiveness, aesthetic sensitivity and, above all, a sustained 
effort to live and work in a world of deeds and to judge oneself by one's 
life. 

The search for values has to be a continuous process, accompanied by 
a constant endeavour to lead lives approximating to those values. Value 
merely perceived is valueless. It must be lived. 

In no country has there been such an insistent search for values as in 
India, through the centuries and again in our age, by many sages. Gandhiji 
showed up the hollowness of mere intellectual. elitism. He unveiled the 
spiritual political power of the ill.iterate and .the llunible have-nots, and 
pointed out that the only programmes Worth preaching are those which 
can be converted into action. Any fight for a larger ca.us~ gives confidence. 
It is so much easier 
to accept. What are values? Is there any meaning in merely urging ''tell 
the truth" or "be good"? Vlhat is goodness? ,vhat is truth? Today, some 
talk superficially of the 'Kundalini', of 'ecstasy' and so on, as if these are 
easily attained. But we do not see this matched by any consideration 
of right conduct or responsibility. 

How few are the people who question and think! 

There is a great gap between word and action. As T.S. Eliot said in his 

beautiful poem : 

Between the idea and the reality, 
Between the motion and the act, 
Between the conception and the creation, 
Between the emotion and the response, 
Falls the shadow. 

We must look into ourselves; we must ask ourselves fundamental 
questions about the relationship between man and man, and man to this 
world. Only the seriousness and depth with which we search can throw 
up an answer. 

Tolerance and compassion are active, not passive states, born of the 
capacity to listen, to observe and to respect others. They are founded on 
a reverence for life that shows itself in one's attitude to man and to the earth 
and to other creatures. This state of listening, observing, is to be alive; it 
is a state of understanding and is the manifestation of a truly scientific mind 
that is mature with the quality of humanness. Ends may vary but means 
must be based on the acceptance of man as the centre of all quest. 

We, in India, are dedicated to the ideal of brotherhood which our 
country has professed for generations on behalf of our land of many peoples. 
Let us reinforce the principle of co-operation without interference among 
nations. We have attained freedom through non-violence. Let us raise our 
voices against violence of any kind-violence in thought, violence in emotion, 
violence in action. 

We have just begun a new year, and, I th.ink it is a good time to think 
about these fundamental matters and see how linked they are to whatever 
we are doing or whatever we wish to do. I hope this new year can give each 
one of us a new direction. 

Swamiji said it is for the politicians to guide, but I believe that people 
do not really take guidance. 
It is for everyone, as Swami Vivekananda 
said, · to seek guidance within. Only then will they be willing to listen to 
what others .'l.re saying. 

The Rich Heritage of Tamil 
I AM GLAD to be with you for the valedictory session of the Fifth World 
It evokes 
Conference of Tamil Studies in this historic city (Madurai). 
memories of the Sangam or Tamil Academy whose poet wrote words of 
lasting impact and scholars produced anthologies of long poems. It is a 
befitting setting for an international congregation of scholars to ponder 
over the literature, history, art and culture enshrined in the Tamil language 
which forms an important part of our 1nultilingual and multicultural ethos. 

1-viadurai reminds us of the sacred Kura!, the literary and ethical 
masterpiece which embodies the essential principles and d.uties of life. So 
long as men appreciate the values, virtues and reason, it will continue to 
inspire. Its relevance to our times is as fresh as it was centuries ago when 
poet-sage Tiruvalluvar set out to "pour the contents of the seven seas" 
into it. 

Like India itself, Tamil culture has always been open to new ideas and 
to the winds of change in 1nan's onward march. The great Avvaiyar said: 
"Cross the far-flung seas," referring to the sea-faring life of Tamils who had 
extensive trade with Egypt, Greece, Rome and other countries. Aromatics 
and spices, jewels and cotton cloth as fine as a cloud of steam, were articles 
of regular export. Greek and Latin authors wrote of the high culture and 

Address at the valedictory function of the Fifth World Conference of Tamil Studies, 
Madurai, January 10, 1981 

vigour of the Tamil people. The Greeks, and later on the Arabs, were 
intermediaries in this international trade. The Greeks borrowed many Tamil 
words which have found their way into European lan!,:ruages. Among them 
are 'rice' from the Tamil arisi, and the precious stone 'beryl' from Tamil 
In the early centuries of the Christian era, the trade between 
Vaidurya. 
South India and Rome reached enormous value. Tamil lands prospered 
and attained a high degree of material civilization. The existence of a 
Greco-Roman colony in Madurai is attested by the discovery of large 
quantities of Roman coins. The bard of the Purananuru expresses this 
cosrnopolitan character in an ode which begins : 'To us all towns are one, 
all men are kin.' 

The Biblical King Solomon got ivory, apes and peacocks from Tamil 
lands. The names by which these articles were known are the same as in 
Tamil. 

Tamil is a rich and ancient language. It is the only spoken India)l 
. language with a vast classical literature, written in an idiom not far removed 
- from its modern f'orm. :i:ts classical literature is still intelligible to the educa-
ted. Its immortal voice is echoed in Subramanya. Bharati's poetry. Bharati's 
patriotic songs aroused thousands of men and· women during our freedom 
struggle. His poems are a powerful plea for equality of all and a break 
away from superstitious customs. In the foreword to his epic poem Panchali 
Sapatham, he wrote : "Anyone who can compose a poem in simple words 
and simple style, easy metre set in a popular tune, lends new life 
to his 
mother tongue." In this, Bharati set a new dimension for the development 
of all Indian languages. 

From its earliest period-, the Tamil language was enriched by persons 
from aJl walks of life and all sections of society. Among the Sangam poets 
were farmers, women, hillmen, foresters, herdsmen, merchants, agricultural 
labourers, shepherds, potters, fishermen and so on. The literary heritage 
of Tamil fostered universal values woven iri a synthesis of the be.st. 

Tamil and other Dravidian languages have made worthy contribution 
to the art, thought and languages of Asia. 
In the fifth century, Prince 
Bodhidharma of Kanchi introduced Zen Buddhism to China, from where 
it spread to Japan and is still a living force. 

In the eighth century, the South Indian teacher Bodhiruchi translated 
53 Buddhist works into Chinese. There was a continuous tradition of South 
Indian savants visiting and teaching 
in East Asia, where Vajrabodhi 
introduced esoteric doctrines, creating far-reaching socio~cultural changes. 
Among them 1nay be n1entioned the establishment of schools for children 
of the common people. 

As early as the eighth century, the Tamil land was a center of studies 
of foreign languages like Chinese. Chinese annals inforn1 us that Prajna 
had studied the Chine·se language in the Tamil land before coming over to 
China to translate Buddist sutras. The Javanese script of Indonesia evolved 

from the Pallava script of Tamil Nadu and was in daily use until the middle 
of our century. The outstanding Tamil classic Manimekhala has been 
performed to our days in Kampuchean and Thai dances. 

Tamil has been a force of enrichment of human culture. At the same 
time, it is mellifluous in its cathedrals of thought. The English word 'n1ango' 
is derived from the Tamil mankay through the Portuguese manga. Tamil 
tradition, with its poetic profundity and moral daring, is a luminous element 
in our culture, in harmony of man, nature and values. 

Our history books, for the most part, follow the trend of British authors, 
largely neglecting the South. Vincent Smith wrote in the twenties: "Hitherto, 
most historians of ancient India have written as if the South did not exist." 
Another great historian .says : "On any view, the history of South India is 
an integral, and not the least interesting part of the history of India. The 
Deccan is one of the oldest inhabited regions of the world and its prehistoric 
archaeology and contacts with neighbouring lands constitute an important 
. chapter in the history of the World's civilization." 

It is my good fortune t; have grown up at a tirne when every ·region .· 
of our vast land began to rejoice in its Indianness and.every region began 
to discover once again its distinctive wealth. I was lucky also to have a father 
who felt he was heir to the best and most profound of all aspects of Indian 
culture, indeed of human civilization as a whole. From my earliest childhood, 
I was taught to shun any narrowness. Born in the North, I studied in the 
western and eastern parts and, early in life, travelled all over the South. 

I a1n sorry I cannot speak in Tamil although I did learn it for some 
time. However, over the years, since my first visit to the South 50 years ago, 
I have heard Tamil spoken and admired its strength and grace. I have read 
translations and accounts of some of the great Tamil literary classics, the 
sacred Kura!, the moving story of Kannagi, the psalms and hymns of the 
. great Tamil saints, Kamba Ramayana, not to speak of the soul-stirring 
songs of Bharati. All these are :jewels of Indian, indeed of world literature. 
Orators of Tamil have cast their spell on v.ast audiences: Satyamurthi and 
Annadurai through their eloquence, Rajaji through his subtlety and Kamarai 
through his homespun directness. 

Social divisions have greatly harmed our lives but a wise Tamil classic 
shows how we can rise above caste when it declares that there are only two 
castes in society: those who give and those who do not give. The religious 
and secular have had a fine blend in Tamil. You must be proud that Jains 
and Buddhists, Shaivites and Vaishnavites, Christians, Muslims and agnostics 
have all expressed themselves forcefully in Tamil. 

The growth of a language depends upon the quality of thought that 
is expressed through it. It grows through encounter and absorption. Tamil 
itself had an old encounter with Sanskrit; and both languages benefited. 
Tam.ii has nothing to fear from Sanskrit or from English or from Hindi. 
Its intrinsic vitality can never be affected; nor the spring in its heart run 

EDUCAT~ON AND CULTURE 

dry. The belief that one language gains at the cost of another is incorrect. 
The Government of India's policy is to help the development of all languages 
of India; not only those mentioned in the Eighth Schedule of the Constitution, 
It is entirely erroneous to 
but even smaller languages and tribal dialects. 
propagate, as some people do, that Delhi cares only for Hindi. For the 
Union Government, all regional languages are dear. We think of Hindi as 
a link language to bring people closer. We do not want imposition, for that 
would have the opposite effect. 

The time has come to stop linguistic quarrels in our country. Much 
energy is needlessly expended on such parochial controversies. People 
must learn more languages. The mother may speak to the child in one 
tongue, but Mother Earth· has to speak in many languages to its children 
in different continents and countries. 

As this Tamil Conference comes to an end I should like to repeat with 

Subra:manya Bharati : 

'.'Ifthere is light inside, .· 
The tongue will be illun1inated, 
If like the floods the art and poetry were to surge, 
Even the blind can see and serve. 
\Vith the taste of sweet Tamil, 
We shall see godliness here." 

Flowering of Islam in India 
As YOU KNOW, this is a seminar on Islam's contribution to the culture 
and civiiization of the world with special reference to India. As one entrusted 
with the responsibility of the government of a nation with the second largest 
Muslim population of the entire world, I welcome and greet you all, scholars 
of the great Islamic tradition from various parts of the world. 

But, to us, more important than the size of the Muslim community is 
its vital contribution to Indian life through several centuries. Islamic elements 
have interacted with other elements of our land, influencing and being 
influenced in practically every branch of human activity: in philosophy and 
matters of the spirit; in statecraft and social organization; in art, architecture, 
music and literature; in mathematics; in medicine and crafts and technologies; 
indeed, in the food we eat; the dress we wear; the very words we speak. 

Inaugural spc:ech at the International Seminar on Islam's Contribution to the Culture and 
Civilization of the World, with Special Reference to India, New Delhi, January 28, 1981 

At several points of time in the last 1,400 years since the rise of Islam, 
Delhi has attracted some of the greatest seers and scholars of the Islamic 
world. Even today, Delhi and other cities give visual and aural evidence 
of this long connection. 

Our great pride is that Indian culture is a composite one, born of many 
strands and colours, and that in the process of assimilating or in.B.uencing, 
it has been India's special genius to allow each component to retain its 
distinctive flavour and character. The metaphor used by some writers is 
that India is not a melting pot but a mosaic. 

There have been l\tiuslim kingdoms and conquerors in India. But Islam 
came as a religion and as a culture to India several centuries before it came 
as a political force. For several centuries, if not millennia, before the advent 
of the Holy Prophet, there were links of culture and commerce between the 
people of India and the people of West Asia. So, when Islam transformed 
the life and intellectual horizons· of the peopl_e of Arabia, it did not take 

· . long for the influence to be felt in India. . 

A great European whd becarrie a1i Indian, lvfrs fa..nnie Besai1t, has nicalled 
the 1narvels and miracles achieved by Islam in its first decades in the following 
words: 

"From the eighth century till the fourteenth, in the hand of the children 
of Islam is gripped the torch of science. Wherever they go they carry 
learning with them; they conquer, but where they conquer they found 
schools, universities. 
The universities of Cairo, of Baghdad, of 
Cordoba, grew up under the shadow of the Prophet. Christian Europe 
crowds to Andalusia to learn from the Mussulman teacher the elements 
of forgotten science; they bring astronomy; they translate the Siddhanta 
of India and other books. They invent. What do they '.llot invent? 
They take up mathematics from the Hindu and the Greek, they discover 
equations of the second degree, then the quadratic; they discover and 
invent spherical trigonometry; they study the stars; they measure the 
size of the earth within a degree or two. They make a new architecture, 
they discover a new music, they teach scienfo'ic agriculture, they bring 
manufactures to the highest pitch of excellence. But is that all? No. 
In philosophy, they are still greater. They dive into the very being of 
the Supreme." 

The quotation is long but I have quoted it because it captures 

the 
excitement and achievement of Islamic civilization as few other brief accounts 
have done. 

It is for scholars like you to delve into the more abstruse points of 

Islamic philosophy. 
nary illumination, compassion and ever-renewing relevance of the Holy 
Prophet's teaching. He said: "Unto every one of you, we have given a 

I shall content myself by paying tribute to the extraordi-

r·.:·· 

law and an open path; and if God had pleased, He had surely made you 
one people. But He hath thought fit to give you different laws, that He 
might try you in that which He hath given you respectively. Therefore, 
strive to excel each other in good works; unto God shall ye all return, and 
then will He declare unto you that concerning which ye have disagreed." 
. Can there be a greater statement of the concept of tolerance, the one 
virtue which we need above all to save man and the world at this critical 
stage of history? 

In his surpassing humility, the Holy Prophet described himself as 
unlettered. Yet, who could be wiser 
than the person who declared: 
"Knowledge enables its possessor to distinguish what is forbidden from 
what is not; it lights the way to heaven; it is our friend in the desert, our 
society in solitude, our companion when bereft of friends-an armour 
against enemies". 

Through this emphasis on knowledge, on·striving, on compassion and 
on duty, Islam became a great catalyst of .world-wide change, ·building. a 
den1ocratic fraternity, bririgirig about eq-µality between women and. men, 
. and inspiring numerous tribes and sects with the vision of a common human 

destiny. 

India's links with the traders and seafarers of the Arab world enabled 
Islam to come here soon after its rise in Arabia. Al-Ishatakhri, an Arab 
writer of the tenth century, wrote about Mussulmans and masjids in the 
cities of the Rashtrakuta empire. The Ravuttans and Labbe com..rnunity of 
!viuslims in Tamil Nadu are among the c9ntinuing proofs of the early arrival 
of Islam in India. The tomb of Nathed Vali at Tiruchirapalli bears the date 
417 A.H. The remains of the saint Hazrat Aliyar Shah Sahib were buried 
near Madurai even earlier. The fame of Khwaja Moinuddin Chishti, who 
is laid to rest in Ajmer, is too widespread to _need recounting. All this 
shows that the cultural contact ofislam=b.ad commenced much before :tvfuslim 
rulers came to conquer and build kingdoms in this country. 

The contact of Islamic and earlier Indian thought gave fillip to two 
important movements within Isllun and Hinduism, namely, Sufism and 
the Bhakti school. Somewhere in the course of the 
tentative mutual 
probings of these two great cultures, the scriptural texts indicating 
the 
attributes of God came to be studied with attention. In the words of the 
Quran,"'one of the main attributes of God is 'Loftiest in the heavens and 
the earth', and the Sufis strove to conceive this through their own experience. 
The Southern Vaishnavas liken God to an 'ocean of all nectar-like attributes'. 
Again, the attributes of God are many, says the Quran; in the Indian epic, 
the Mahabharat, the Kuru patriarch Bhishma teaches the thousand known 
names of God. According to some of the commentators of the Ouran, 
the world itself is but a tajalli, or manifestation of His attributes, and the 
creation of the world a form of emanation. 'Behold the Opus of the Lord!' 
exclaims the Atharva Veda. 

Sufism leaned heavily on the Quranic concept of tawakkul, trust in God, 
which had its Indian equivalent in prapatti. The stream of Ran1anuja's 
bhakti commingling with Sufism reached its fulfilment in Kabir, who praised 
Rama-Rahim and Krishna-Karim, and in the faith propounded by Guru 
Nanak. 

From this kind of interaction of Sufism with Bhakti emerged several 
eclectic, egalitarian and reformist orders which gave deep emotional solace 
to the larger population. As my father, Jawaharlal Nehru, wrote in his 
Discovery of India: 

"Hinduism as a whole felt the impact of the new ideas ... Muslim 
mysticis1n and Sufism; which probably had had its beginnings in 
neo-Platonism, grew ... The idea of. the brotherhood of Islam and of 
the theoretical equality of its adherents made a powerful appeal. .. 
· From this ideological impact grew up various movements aiming at a 
religious synthesis ... Each person could 
· of i:nore popular · and · simplei· 
forms of worship. . He could 
be a Vaishnavite and believe in a personal god and pour out his faith 
to him. Or more philosophically inclined, he could wander in the 
tenuous realms or metaphysics and high philosophy." 

take his choice of these or · · 

The Hindu-Muslim exchange created famous landmarks in liierature, 
philosophy, architecture, language, music and art. 
In his work Nur Sipahr, 
Amir Khusrau makes special mention of Indians as 'the creators of the 
Panchatantra', the immortal story-book of worldly wisdom which was 
translated into Persian, Turkish, Arabic and Daii. This became famous 
as the Arabic Kali!ah Damnah. Professor Mujeeb points out that the 
translation of the Upanishads, made by prince Dara Shikoh was due not 
merely to literary curiosity but to a passionate search for truth, and he must 
have felt that in the Upanishads, the goal, 'the confluence of the t":,'.O oceans' 
had been reached. The famous Hari Mandir of the Sikhs in Amritsar, 
the Govinda Deva temple in Brindavan, and the Tirumalai Nayak Mahal 
in Madurai all reveal influences of Muslim architecture. The age-old plastic 
idiom of the art of Ajanta yielded to the new laws of symmetry, proportion 
and spacing from Samarqand and Herat. Muslim builders, in turn, absorbed 
many an insight from Hindu and Buddhist building skills. 

We have always recognized Islam as one of our own religions and Islam 
will continue to grow and flourish in India. Our mosaic allows each piece 
to retain its shape and colour while forming part .of a grand design. 
Muslims in India are full and equal partners in national life-its politics, 
its production processes, its commerce, its defence, its education, its art and 
literature, its self-expression. Every opportunity that is open to any Indian 
is open to an Indian r.1uslim. V-le make no discrimination against the 
adherent of any religion. All faiths are entitled to equal protection and 

equal respect. This we have named 'secularism' which entitles each Indian 
to pursue his own belief and learn more about his own creed. But it also 
requires him to extend the same right to persons of other religions. Numerous 
research and teaching institutions of India will continue t0 provide the fullest 
opportunities for the study of Islamic thought and cultural heritage. The 
political rebirth of so many Islamic nations, and the new relations we have 
established with them, provide fresh impetus to Islamic studies in India. 
As Islam enters the fifteenth century of its history, I give my greetings 
and good wishes to every Muslim in India and everywhere else in the wide 
v.rorld. 
I have pleasure in inaugurating this seminar and I give my good 
wishes to its deliberations and also to all the other programmes connected 
with these celebrations. 

Challenges Before Higher Education 

in 

to participate 

the centenary celebrations of 

I AM DELIGHTED 
St. Stephen's which is known for its excellence and high standards of achieve-
ment. This is an occasion of rejoicing not only for those connected with 
this institution but also for the intellectual con1munity of our capital city. 
The College was born at a seed-time in our cultural and political history. 
In the nineteenth century, the decade of the eighties in our country was 
next only to the decade of the fifties in dramatic eventfulness and importance. 
The early 1850s saw small extension of the British Industrial Revolution to 
India il\ the form of railways, textile mills and the telegraph; the first 
universities and high courts also belong to that time. Above all, the decade 
is remembered for the Great Uprising of 1857. 

That Uprising was crushed. 

India was proclaimed to be the keystone 
of the imperial arch. However, within a generation, the urge of self-assertion, 
if not of freedom, sprouted again. 
In the eighties, the first municipalities 
were established and Tilak founded his Kesari and Mahratta, Bankim 
Chandra wrote Vande Mataram. Three years later, the Indian National 
It was in such a decade of great beginnings that your 
Congress was born. 
College was founded. 

A couple of days ago, I spoke of Isla1n's contribution to our national 
culture and consciousness. This College was started by a Christian 1nission, 
and today I should like to express my deep appreciation of the work done 
by Christian pioneers not only in education and medical and social service, 
but in our intellectual evolution. Christian priests and scholars from various 

Speech at the centenary celebrations of St. Stephen's College, Delhi, February l, 1981 

European countries made special study of our languages and literatures. 
Many missionaries brought out our first 
lexicons. They also laid the 
foundation of research of our plants and minerals, of our manners and our 
customs. The presses they set up to spread ·the teachings of Chirst paved 
the way for a publishing industry which enabled the messages of all creeds 
also to be propagated. As in every walk of life, so in the nationalist struggle, 
our Christians have vied with others, and today they bear a full share of 
nation-building tasks. 

A college is not merely a pile of stone and masonry. 

It is a body of 
people who imbibe knowledge, who shape thoughts and transmit them to 
their successors. 
In the last hundred years, many learned men have taught 
here and the College has produced notable scholars and public servants, 
soldiers and sportsmen. Some of their names have been mentioned in the 
speeches made. But two, which I should like to recall are those of Principal 
Sushil Rudra and Charles Freer Andrews-friends and confidants of t\1ahatma 
Gandhi. They brough(' renown to 'this institution. Few tributes that 
·Gandhiji composed are as suffused with affection as the obituary he 'wrote 
for Principal Rudra, · in which he confessed ho;v non-cooperation was 
conceived when he was his guest. He was worried that this friendship might 
harm the interest of the College and his host's career. But Professor Rudra 
brushed aside these doubts, declaring that if he were compelled to make a 
choice, he knew what to choose. 

Each ofus, when confronted with a choice, 1nust know what to choose; 
obviously, we should choose the cause of the country and the cause of truth. 
The nation's affairs should be run so that there is no conflict between the 
claims of truth and the claims of the country. Examples of persons like 
Principal Rudra help the academic community to evolve this kind of value 
system. 

Our educational system, especially higher education, 

faces many 
challenges. We look to our colleges ap.d universities to provide the scientific 
and engineering skills needed to transform our economy and also the body 
of knowledge which makes us discerning and capable citizens. 
It has been 
said that the aim of education is to make each person fit company for himself 
and, at the same time, to enable him to come out of his shell into one 
humanity. Learning is a never-ending process and the sources of knowledge 
are countless. An old sage said, "I have learnt much from my teachers, and 
from my colleagues more than from my teachers, and from 1ny students 
more than from all". 
I would extend this to all the ordinary people one 
meets and to nature itself. 

Education is a liberating force and in our age it is also a democratising 
force, cutting across the barriers of caste and class, smoothing out inequalities 
imposed by birth and other circumstances. Children of groups and strata, 
which for centuries had been deprived of econon1ic opportunity, oCpolitical 
power and of the fruits of culture, are avid for higher education because of 

EDUCATION AND CULTURE 

its promise. However, one of the problems of our educational system is 
that somehow it seems to aggravate disparities instead of reducing them, 
for even those who have a short spell at school or college are inclined to 
think of themselves as a ctass apart. Besides, examinations are largely 
based on presentational skills rather than on sound understanding. I was 
very happy to hear of your proposal of evaluating work and I can assure 
you that you have my full support in this. Talent and ability unfold at 
different stages and in many directions. So, these tests cannot always assess 
brilliance or gauge intellectual earnestness and vigour. Nor is there effort 
to build the capacity for self-reliance which is so badly needed. Here is a 
challenge to our own educational system-to make equality truly meaningful 
without stunting or constricting quality. 

A scintilJating top stratum needs to be upheld by a high average. Hence 
the necessity of improving the general level of pyrformance. 
!viuch is made 
of 'leadership', but not enough said about the responsibilities of others. 
· In fact, successful nations are those where the people do not have to be led 
but lead. themselves. 
but we must· 1earn· to emphasise collective achievement, collective. heroism 
and the collective will to work. One of the functions of education is to 
produce this kind of mature, well-adjusted and responsible citizen who 
thinks not only of his opportunities but of his obligations. 

In exceptional times; leadership has a. special plac~ · . 

Many people tend to divide persons, emotions and events into separate 
categories labelling them according to their own limited vision. They 
judge the reactions of others according to their own preconceptions. Thus 
they are astonished at an outcome which is different from their assessment 
even though it may be quite a natural one. The various facets of life are 
interlinked, giving it unity and balance. Sunshine and shadow are part 
of the san1e and interwoven. 

So, it is sometimes the most adverse of circumstances and the toughest 
going which give deeper satisfaction and sustenance to the spirit than the 
more comfortable life or the smoother path. There is something in struggle 
which arouses the best in mankind. The very effort stretches one's 
faculties 
to the utmost. Why else should man cross continents and 
oceans in search of adventure? Why else does something as horrible as 
war, with alJ its heart-breaks, create a special kind of comradeship? As 
Helen Keller, one ofmy favourite persons, has written : "Character cannot 
be developed in ease and quiet. Only through experience of trial and 
suffering can the soul be strengthened, vision cleared, ambition inspired 
and success achieved". 

To go back to the India of the last 100 years, the days were indeed 
dark. Conditions were far from propitious, opportunities were extremely 
limited; chances of advancement practically non-existent whether in the 
services or in the economic system. There was hardly any urban mid4le 
class. Villages were devastated by frequent famines and epidemics. There 

was increasing oppression and humiliation. Yet, the very challenge called 
forth the spirit of endeavour and achievement and gave strength and passion 
to our freedom movement. A time which was so grim turned out to be a 
remarkable ceatury. What a resplendent galaxy of great Indians the 
pre-Independence period produced in scholarship, in law, in literature, 
in social refonn, in industry, in science and, not the least, in spiritual quest! 
Equally notable was the effect of the freedom struggle itself. The oppression 
we had to face entailed untold hardship, confiscation of personal belongings, 
the breaking of families, the ending of formal education, among other 
difficulties. Did I say hardship ? No. \Ve regarded all these as badges 
of honour. Vast numbers of ordinary men and women participated. Even 
the very poor were lifted above the misery of their daily lives and rose to 
heights because of their dedication to a larger cause. 

In its own and in quite a different way, ours is a period of turbulence 
too. But this time it is a world-wide challenge. Some call it a crisis of 
character, others a crisis of civilization. 
I have my own :view of.some of . 
. the causes but won't go irito them here. Anyhow, it is niore impo1;tant to · 
consider how to meet the crisis than merely to analyse it. 

In the West, a succession of scientific discoveries opened out a vista 
of limitless expectation and faith-great expectation that science would solve 
all problems and 
the inevitability of a better future. Where 
technology has advanced, it has liberated people from much of drudgery. 
At the same time, it has created new economic and social problems, brought 
new diseases and, most distressing of all, created a sense of alienation, 
uncertainty and a destructive restlessness. The marvels of science are now 
taken for granted. There is widespread concern for the rapid depletion of 
essential resources but the will to take positive action is not there. People 
run here and there in search of contentment and try to grasp at any straw 
of happiness. As Kabir sang, the fish in the water are thirsty. 

faith in 

Sh~uld we despair? Dr Radhakrishnan used to say that we may not 
be able to influence events but we can control our own reactions to them. 
In this the nation looks to its intellectuals to give the lead. The Indian 
people have great resilience. We are at a stage of development when we 
can avoid some of the harmful effects of industrial growth; we can and we 
must transform adversity into opportunity. The time has come not to fight 
amongst ourselves-one language against another, one caste against another, 
one religion against another, one region against another-but to shelve these 
differences and to work together as Indians because only that old spirit of 
nationalism, which in our age 1nust be combined with 
international 
understanding and co-operation, can generate the momentum for progress. 
Intellectuals deal with ideas, some that are timeless and universal, and 
others that are of the moment. The centre of our concern should be our 
people. We must help them to derive energy from their roots, yet grow with 
new ideas. 

St. Stephen's College has prided itself on being an elite College. The 
I hope that the College 
elite is the tip but it alone does not make the nation. 
I am glad that 
will continue to produce outstanding men and women. 
it has passed over 
I have pleasure in 
inaugurating the centenary celebrations. May the lustre of this institution 
remain undimmed. 

its male chauvinistic interlude! 

Tasks Before our Academic Community 
A COUPLE OF days ago, our latest satellite launching vehicle soared into 
the sky and our scientists scored another triumph. This is a tribute to our 
science and also to our educational system. 

When we meet at conferences like this, we speJ:J.d so much time bemoaning 
·. · our shortcomings and berating our .. failures .. that we iose · sight of · our 

own strong points .. Stock-taking should be honest and should count the . 
pluses as well as the minuses. Candid self-examination is understa11,dable 
and essential but not self-denigration. 

Vie have built a vast infrastructure of science and technology and of 
training and research in other fields of knowledge. Few countries have 
a greater enrolment or a large number of qualified scholars. 
In the last 
30 years particularly, education has percolated to backward strata and 
regions, thus stimulating social mobility. Our political system based on 
adult franchise; our economic system based on socialistic planning reaching 
unto the last, and our educational system which stresses equality of access 
are bringing about greater involvement of the people-a true participatory 
democracy. 

In the past, even though the role and importance of educational 
development were emphasised in Plan documents, in practice education 
was treated as a social amenity r_ather than as a basic and crucial input for 
human resource develop1nent which in tum is fundamental to social and 
economic development. The Working Group on Education (1980) has laid 
considerable emphasis on the pivotal role of education in the development 
of the hum.an being as a vital resource and a vital component of social and 
economic development. The Sixth Plan document also emphasises this 
point. Formulation and 
implementation of educational development 
progral1111.1es should reflect and manifest appreciation of this role of education. 
The Education Minister has referred to education now being on the 
Concurrent List. It is urgent to undertake detailed work to formulate 

Address at \he conference of State Ministers of Education, New Delhi, June 2, 1981 

SELECfED SPEECHES A..ND WRITINGS OF INDIRA GA}lDHl 

proposals to enable the gradual realization of the expectations which have 
been raised by this. 

There is much discussion in academic and political circles about 
reservations. These should be seen as our society's response to correct 
the consequences of centuries of discrimination. Some young people ask 
why their generation should be asked to pay for the sins of their forefathers. 
Everyone has to do this, whether he wishes to or not. No matter who we 
are or where we live or whether we have an important position or not, by 
our actions and our thinking each of us shapes the future. History is 
inescapable-neither the past, nor the future which we are building. 

No class of students should feel that teachers are unsympathetic, if 
not hostile, to them. 
It is indeed sad when any group of students, or for 
that matter others, should think that they can get justice only from teachers 
or superiors of their own caste. The entire fraternity of teachers should 
make a special effort to remove any such impression. There need be _no_ 
conflict between reservation and quality. Talent.is not a 111onopoly of any 
itis the task of the educational system.to serve as the talent 
class or caste. 
scout of society and t6 enable each individual and each group to overcome 
handicaps of birth and circumstances and to develop the latent potential. 

Some trends are especially disturbing; the crass commercialisation of 
many educational institutions, the proliferation of engineering and medical 
colleges in some States, the use of schools and colleges to serve and promote 
communal and parochial interests, and the interference of some governments 
with educational institutions to compel them to subserve some ideologies 
a.nd dogmas. 

The Union Government is strongly against the system of capitation fee 
or devices that give undue advanta-ge to some and impose a tremendous 
burden on others. No less disquieting is the tendency on the part of small 
groups of people to tamper with curricula and overtly or covertly introduce 
textbooks. That is why it is 
communal and ideological prejudice into 
It is also unfortu-
essential to have a very careful scrutiny of all textbooks. 
nate that some State Governments have set aside the normal statutes 
governing educational institutions and have appointed packed executive 
bodies. These tendencies and actions bring down the level of our nation. 
You have mentioned literacy. Obviously, the nation must be made 
literate. We must not allow our people to be exploited merely because they 
cannot read documents to which they have to put their thumb impression 
or be taken in other ways. Therefore, I fully support the literacy programme. 
But I should like to point out, as I have done before, that literacy by 
itself is not enough. What is literacy? Is it enough for a person to be able 
to know his letters or is it equally important to see what he or she is going 
to read? When we look around the world and see the sort of stuff that 
nations which have a hundred_ per cent literacy read, I must say I am a bit 
disheartened with that whole aspect of literacy. It does not mean that we 

BDUCATI;ON AND CULTURE 

should give up the programme. But it does mean that we should not follow 
in their footsteps but that, along with literacy, we must build the character 
and provide the right type of reading material. 

Education is not an easy way towards employment but a training to 
make better men and women. As Swami Vivekananda said, it is not so 
much what one knows but what one becomes. To improve education we 
must tackle it at its very root, that is, teachers' training, which must include 
simple items such as elementary hygiene, sanitation, care for the environment 
and for other living creatures, going on to the inculcation of higher values 
and ideas which develop mental and moral calibre. Are our methods of 
teaching keeping pace with the changing world? This does not necessarily 
mean expensive equipment; sometimes equipment helps but what is n1ore 
relevant is the attitude of the teacher. Does the teacher evoke the respect 
of the students? Without that, teaching cannot be very deep. 

In our country, because of our great diversity; we do not want 

regimentation or uniformity. - It- is important that the teacher should· be · . 
able to relate his or her teaching to the local context and to things which . 
are .. familiar to the child. - I remember the days when we learnt our 
mathematics in pounds, shillings and pence without even having seen that 
currency or knowing what it means. We learnt English history and we had 
no idea of what had happened in our own country. Much of that has 
changed now but not satisfactorily enough. We still do not teach enough 
about our freedom struggle, about what India has been, what it has gone 
through and how it has met its many challenges. Only that background 
can give us 
future 
challenges. 

the determination 

the courage and 

to meet 

Most important" are the consciousness of responsibilities to match 
rights, of duties corresponding to privileges, and the concept of national 
I should like to say that in no way does this 
unity and national integrity. 
It is when one knows one's pwn area best that 
conflict with local loyalty. 
one can go on to a wider field. 
In 1nany countries of Europe, children 
are taught to recognize every pJant and every animal that is found in the 
area. Our country may be too big but at least children can know their 
district. If their knowledge of the district is thorough, it will not be so 
difficult to widen that knowledge. 

Contemporary education has neglected moral and spiritual values which 
I feel strongly that our education must aim 
are common to all religions. 
at excellence. 
I am alarmed to see the shoddiness of some of our textbooks 
in their appearance as well as the substance. Foundations cannot be firm 
without stress on quality and the maximum use of whatever material and 
talents are at hand, combined with the maximum saving also of time, of 
energy, of words as well as of things. 

We should .like to spend more on education and whenever our financial 
position is better, we shall do so, but first we must ensure that what is 

SELECfED SPEECHES AND WRITINGS OF INDIRA GANDHJ 

available is optimally and wisely utilized. Not everything is completely 
dependant on finance. · 

Neither the government nor the academic community has done enough 
to generate a sense of pride in being Indian. This conference is one of 
educational administrators and policy makers. The major policy objectives 
of education should be, besides adding to knowledge itself and the ability 
of using it for constructive and creative purposes, to promote faith in our 
country and to build self-reliance and resourcefulness in the individual. 
He must acquire the ability to meet any situation and take advantage of any 
opportunity. · In fact, he should be capable of creating opportunities. All 
nations, which have gone ahead in the world, have gone through very 
It is because generation after generation made new 
difficult periods. 
opportunities that the nation as a whole rose. 

This, we too are capable of. 

If we were not capable of it, we would 
not have an. increasing number, rising high in so inany different fields of 
activity.·. · Th.is attitude of mind must be inculcated in every student so ·that 
he forgets things like superiority and inferiority and regards himself as an 
Indian, with something to be proud of, something to work and struggle for. 
That is the only way to realize our country's great potential and pave the 
the way for a brighter future for our young people. 

I am glad to have this opportunity of being with you all for a short while. 
I give my good wishes to this conference and I echo what the lvlinister has 
said that I hope you will come up with the positive points which can be 
in1plemented. 
I should like to stress again that all the steps that you want 
to take n1ust have the backing and the support .. of certain fundamental 
ideas and values. if we want our education to be more meaningful than it 
has been in many parts of the world. 

Teachers and Nation-Building 

As PROFESSOR CHATTOPADHYAYA has said, my 
in education 
has always been very deep. 
I was fortunate in having exceedingly good 
teachers all through, beginning with· my parents who taught me that the 
very best teacher was oneself and one's powers of observation and awareness. 
Unless you have these powers, it is not possible to have the capacity to sift 
what has to be absorbed from what needs to be discarded. 

interest 

Inaugural speech at the Convention of Indian Teachers' Congress, New Delhi, 
August 21, 1981 

EDUCATION Ai'lD CULTURE 

The teaching profession has always been a very important profession. 
In olden days, the guru in India played a very crucial role in moulding 
society. After that there were many ups and downs and today we have 
come to a point when, once again, the teacher is important. Although 
a teacher will no longer be accepted in that whole-hearted manner in which 
the guru was, nevertheless he has a very vital role to play in guiding the 
nation. 

\Vhen I come to such conferences; I do not come to guide. I come 
to put forward certain suggestions and certain thoughts. Some of them 
come to mind only after I have seen who are in the gathering. These 
suggestions are not 'suggestions for action' which is a favourite phrase in 
Parliament, but ideas to be thought over and to be adopted if found good 
enough after adaptation to local conditions. Although education must 
stick to certain basic values, it is obvious that it must be adapted to 
the 
traditions and conditions of social life wherever the teaching and the learning 
are taking place. 

I think we are iri. the midst of one such period. 

·. There· ate periods in . the history of humanity which bring about very 
It seems 
great changes. 
tragic to me that most people, whether they are of the intelligentsia or in 
various political parties, including my own, seem to be quite unaware of 
the great changes that have come upon the ,vorld. They will bring certain 
benefits but also raise many new problems, specially for a country like ours 
which has even now not caught up with the changes caused by the Industrial 
It is up to teachers not only to deal with present-day problems 
Revolution. 
which are complex and considerable, but to look into the future and try 
to forewarn and equip their students to 1neet those problems. The children 
of today will one day be face to face with these very revolutionary changes. 

In 1nost magazines and books that are appearing on ne,~ thinking, there 
are forecasts, not astrological but based on an assessment of what is already 
happening, of what would happen in the coming decades. 
Just as a couple 
of centuries ago factories created great 1naterial wealth and social change 
in Europe, we are now in the midst of a different but no less potent revolution 
that will completely change the life-styles of affluent nations. And because 
we cannot keep up with these nations, it will give them an even more enormous 
advantage over us just as the Industrial Revolution gave them an advantage 
over us in the past. Electronics and the use of micro-electronic technology 
are opening out opportunities for cownunication and information which 
will change not only factories and offices but homes and even classrooms. 
This is not something in the remote future; it has already begun. And 
as it grows in the industrialized countries, we cannot escape its effect here. 
Already in Japan, there is increasing use of robots. So far, it is only in the 
factories, but people say that gradually they will take over domestic work; 
they will probably take over some of what is the routine work of teachers 
and, perhaps, they will take over the whole human race quite soon. 
I saw 

' ' !· r ~-

a film on this subject when I was less than eight years old, the very first time 
that I went to Europe with my parents. That was in 1926 or 1927, but they 
had foreseen this development even then. And all of us who saw the film, 
the grown-ups and the children, were powerfully affected by it because it 
conveyed this sense of how we were getting remoter and remoter from the 
earth; how we were exercising less and less control over ourselves and our 
lives. 
In that film, the robots in a factory decided that they did not need 
human managers., that they would manage themselves much better, and they 
removed them. We are moving in that direction and many human beings 
have become robots themselves. 

What matters is our own mental attitude. We have to deal with 
certain basic issues which are old issues and certain issues, equally basic, 
which belong to the future. Already in some of the speeches here, mention 
has been made of secularism and of some of the· forces which are active in 
our country, forces· of chao~, disunity and disintegration, It is in schools, 
beginning from the very youngest child and, if possible, in the homes before 
the child goes. to kindergarten, 'that these things have to bt; taken in hand. 
The teacher does 1i.ot replace the parents but he or she complements the. 
p·arental task. Sometimes, the parents are not fully up to it, as many are not 
nowadays, either because they are preoccupied-even mothers are working--'-· 
or their living conditions are such that they cannot give 
the attention, 
physical or mental, which the child needs. So, this burden has become 
heavier on the teacher from the lowest level up to the university level. Yet 
we find that many of our teachers seem to be 1nore involved in certain 
political aspects rather than the basic ones. Brought up as I have been and 
with the kind of parents and teachers I had, I have not ever been able to 
divide life into con1partments. Politics is not separate from the rest of life 
just as art or anything else is not a department;. it is a p!].rt of a person's 
everyday living. And if one divides up life into separate compartments, 
one becomes a , divided person, one is not a whole person, one is 
not able to meet the challenges that are constantly cropping up. A 
total view and a balanced and .. well-adjusted 1nanner are the mark of 
adulthood. 

Our policies are not to be seen in separate compartments but as one 
whole. The aim, as I have said many times, is to 1nake our country stronger 
not in any military strength, not in any way to bully anybody else, but 
to be able to help our own people to develop the capacities which are inherent 
in them. Swami Vivekananda, who was one of the greatest educationists 
we have had, has said that education is not to know but to be. What we 
are taught should not just' be accumulation of knowledge or information, 
it should make us into better, superior human beings. The same thought 
was further developed by Sri Aurobindo when he said that mankind can be 
a much better race than it is if only it will rise above the- immediate and 
look into its potential power. 

EDUCATION AND CULTIJRE. 

We do realize that while there are social and economic difficulties; while 
a person does not have enough to eat and does not have the ordinary services 
which are his child's due, we cannot ask him to concentrate on these other 
matters. Therefore, the first step must be to ensure greater equality of 
opportunity, more equal distribution of goods and provision of basic needs 
to people. They must have what they need, not just to survive physically, 
but what they need to develop into balanced and well-adjusted adults. 

Contemporary education is tragic in its inadequacy and I am very sad 
because we are partly to blame. We have not been able to change our 
history books or some of the other textbooks for children so as to give them 
a correct idea of India and its history. 
Just a moment before I started 
speaking, Dr Bajpai was saying that some of oui: history books have not 
been revised since 1952 to include modern history. 
In some, statements 
have crept in which are not really very factual or conducive to a united, 
fully integrated nation. 

Vie agreed to the demand of all teachers iri India to bring education 

into the Concurrent List not with the intent to interfere with what the States · 
were doing, but to ensure that certain standards are maintained and that 
nobody · in any part of India propagates a chauvinistic or parochial view 
that will stunt a child's growth, give him an erroneous impression of his 
own country and create divisions between him and his neighbours. The 
neighbour can be living in his own street or in an adjoining State, even in 
a distant part of the country. We are ail neighbours. And today, even 
people living in other countries are more and more our neighbours because 
we are joined together by modern communications and by innumerable 
other bridges. 

A nation,i ike individual, must change and develop constantly. But one 
must not change one's core; the core of one's being is like the axle of the 
wheel which doesn't move. It allows the spokes and the rim of the wheel 
to move but itself remains immovable. So the axle, whether of the nation 
'or the individual, must be firm. It is sad that sometimes people, looking ·at 
other nations and other systems,sµggest that even the axle has to be changed, 
that we must be remodelled in the image of what is happening elsewhere. 
Obviously, that will destroy us, destroy our country. 

Orily those nations can survive wbich have their roots deep down in 
their tradition. But, as some of my remarks made many years ago and 
quoted today by Dr Chattopadhyaya emphasised, this does not mean that 
you stick to all that is old. Life is a process of making choices continuously 
every day, morning till night. Some of these choices are small choices and 
some are big choices. As individuals, as a society, as a party, we have 
constantly to be looking at what to take fron1 tradition, what to take from 
modern life or modern inventions; and also what to reject. 

\Ve can, however, do very little unless one basic tbing exists, i.e., the 
unity of the country. For the unity of the country it is essential that the 

, one belong to a State or speak a particular 

people of all religions, castes and creeds; all languages, all States, consider 
their Indianness or their nationhood as first priority. Only after that does 
language. This in no way 
diminishes the local personality or local loyalty. They are all things which 
strengthen one aI1other and which are enmeshed with one another. Therefore 
secularism, the idea of strengthening Indian unity, the idea of giving special 
attention to those who are weaker than us, either because they are minorities 
or suffer poverty or economic backwardness because of social and historical 
reasons, these are accepted values of all Indians. Our weaker brethren 
must be helped by us; as an elder brother would help a younger brother, 
to stand on their own feet, to contribute to the development of the nation 
rather than being somebody who has to be constantly helped. That is 
the aim of our planning, that is the aim of our prograinn1es for the weak. 
Some people mistakenly believe that there are some advantages in remaining 
weaker so that you get help on a continuing basis. But this does not help 
them nor does. it help the nation. 
· · . I see that your aini.s and objectives are to promote the ideas of democracy, 
socialism and secularism. Now, these are basic to us and I think the three 
I do not think you can have democracy unless there is 
are inseparable. 
social and economic equality which means socialism. You cannot have 
either socialism or democracy if you do not have secularism, that is, when 
any part or any section of your people are not getting the same rights as 
the other parts are getting. 
\Ve have to stress these aspects because 
there are people in the country and outside who take a much narrower 
view. 

Another of your aims is to involve teachers in channelising the energy 
of the teaching fr~ternity into the mainstream of national life and to promote 
national integrati!)n. This·, I believe, is part of the first as well, because if 
the energy of the community is not directed into bringing their students 
(and everybody else they come into contact with) into the 1:11ainstream, how 
will we have democracy? Democracy means a full participation of every 
individual. 
If individuals are not fully involved in what is happening in 
the country, then there is something lacking in democracy. 

Further, you wish to strive and struggle for social and economic 
transformation of society based on equality and justice. That, as I said 
earlier, is the meaning of socialism and secularism. To safeguard 
the 
legitimate rights of teachers and to fight for their socio-economic welfare 
is also a part of it. But, of course, it is a n1ore immediate problem and a 
1nore specific one. Regretfully, it is not always possible to concede all 
den1ands even if they are just and right because of financial constraints and 
so on. But I am one of those who believe that unless we can give a much 
better life and much better opportunities to the teacher, we cannot expect 
the best from the teacher. And if we cannot give the best, then obviously 
we cannot get the best out of the pupil. 

Your other objectives are to fight reactionary, obscurantist, communal 
and fascist forces and to promote a healthy academic atmosphere in 
universities, colleges and other educational institutions; to organize study· 
circles, seminars, symposia, conferences, conventions on social, economic, 
political and educational problems; to analyse, frame and suitably transmit 
to national leadership the considered and felt views of the academic 
community on various national and international problems. These are 
all really linked to the basic objective of how we help the Indian youth to 
grow into a balanced well-adjusted individuals who are able to deal with 
the changing world, the many new challenges which constantly confront us 
now, and the far more complex ones which will certainly come up as the 
industrial world goes into the bewildering electronic age. 

I should like to end with saying that although we have to act unitedly 
and in a disciplined manner, ultimately each person is on his own in taking 
decisions. • And there is nothing more irritating than people coming to 
me, grown-up people, seeking guidance. You can give a broad outline, 
· you can give your views, but it is the person himself or herself who has to 
take the ultimate decision, facing the challenges alone, whether domestic, 
professional or of general public life. Therefore, as the Buddha said, each 
one of us has to be a lamp unto ourselves. And we should try not only to 
have this light within ourselves, but to light other lainps so that there is a 
better atmosphere to implement the many important and vital programmes 
which our Government is committed to advance. 

In Parliainent yesterday, people were 

trying to praise me for our 
scientific achievement and I said, rather sharply, that it was an occasion to 
congratulate and appreciate the work of those who have been directly 
involved, and not of the political leadership. But one point (which I added 
in·:0ne House but could not in the other) is very important. And, that is, 
we- had been giving thought to these matters 
since pre-independence 
days. Whatever we wanted 
to achieve in .-science or in our political 
and economic programmes were matters that were discussed long before 
we became 
independence struggle which 
entailed much suffering and hardship. We were looking ahead to what we 
would do 30 or 50 years later. And, it is because we and our leaders looked 
ahead then, and inculcated those thoughts and vision in us, that we were 
to plan the programmes which enabled our scientists and others to 
progress. Unless today we give similar leadership for the future, we might 
suddenly find ourselves coming to a dead end. The old momentum will die 
if it is not revitalised constantly with fresh ideas and fresh programmes. 

independent, 

during 

the 

I am very happy to have this opportunity of meeting you all and I hope 
that apart from these immediate problems which you must discuss, each 
one of you, when you go back to your institutions and your milieu, will 
give serious thought to some of the things I have said about the future and 
about the necessity of changing mental attitudes. 

It 

One final point. You have probably noticed how much "'attention is 
being given to the problems of environment all over the world. We find that 
our people, even grown-up people, do riot have the most elementary 
knowledge about Nature. They do not know the plants that grow in our 
country, they cannot recognize the birds which they see every day in their 
gardens or on the roads, they do not recognize the trees. Well, I think we 
It 
sadly limit ourselves as people if we are not aware of our surroundings. 
is like living and breathing in a community but not knowing about its 
is exactly the same when you do not know the 
important persons. 
landscape of your country. When I went to Finland, about 30 years ago, T 
found that in every school each child had to be able to recognize the flora 
and the fauna of his country. Of course, Finland is a much smaller country 
and we are very big. But we could start with a district and know about its 
flora and fauna. We need not know the whole of India to begin with. This 
is not useless knowledge. Such an exercise could open up employment 
opportunities also, for you would see how much can be done out of what is 
gr6wing there, out of what exists in the vicinity. In our education, we have. 
to somehow integrate these ideas. 
The safeguarding of the environment, looldng after this Earth on 
which we are dependant, is absolutely necessary. 
I said the other day in 
Nairobi that we have treated the Earth like a toy. Vie thought we could do 
what we like with it. 
If we felt like digging, we dug out what we liked, 
regardless of whether we were finishing it off, careless of whether it was 
harming the land. Consequently, in spite of so much more irrigation, as 
more new land is coming under irrigation and under production, we find some 
of the old land is becoming saline and useless. 

All these things are linked. All these things are part of our daily 
If we ignore any part, as I said, the nation 
awareness and education. 
cannot have well-balanced development. Neither can the individual. We 
have very great expectations- from you because the future of the young 
people of India, which n1eans the future of the country itself, is in your 
hands. 

Education and Development 
I THANK YOU for this opportunity of meeting you all and for the honorary 
degree you have conferred on me. This University is a centre of study and 

Speech on the occasion of the conferment of the degree of Doctor of Laws (hc11ods causa) 
at the University of South Pacific, Suva, Fiji, September 26, 1981 

research from which Fiji has high expectations. Education is one of the 
principal concerns of all governments, particularly those of developing 
countries. Everywhere, there is debate on the role of education and its 
meaning for individuals, for nations and the world as a whole. 
It is a 
fascinating subject. 

As my father Jawaharlal Nehru observed 

"A university stands for humanism, for tolerance, for reason, for the 
It stands for the 
adventure of ideas, and for the search for truth. 
onward n1arch of the human race towards ever higher objectives. 
If 
then it is well with 
the universities discharge their duties adequately, 
the nation and the people." 

India has been fortunate in her great teachers. . Through song and . 

story, . through our legends and great epics, the aim .was to .teach. moral 
vaiues, codes ·of behaviour and something about the.unity of our country 
across the shifting borders of many kingdoms. There were the great 
religious teachers-the Buddha and Mahavira. Later, the Emperor Ashoka 
inscribed bis teachings of brotherhood amongst men and concern for animals 
on his rock and pillar edicts. Much later, the Emperor Akbar taught by 
example, encouraging cultural activities of a high standard and reinforcing 
communal harmony. In our own times, Swami Vivekananda, Sri Aurobindo 
and J. Krishnamurthy have continued this tradition.· Different styles and 
methods, but the basic sustaining thought has been the same. 

One's education is not judged by what one knows but what one 
becomes. Education is not merely the accumulation of information but the 
discipline of mind that makes for a balanced, well-adjusted person who is 
capable of meetifi:g the changing challenges of life. 

In my life I had the great privilege of being close to many great men who 
were not inhibited by national horizons. These Indians had their roots 
deep in our culture and tradition, yet their vision stretched out to the future. 
Amongst the tallest were Tagore, in whose University at Santiniketan I spent 
a year, and Mahatma Gandhi who was a father figure. His prayer meetings 
dealt with a variety of subjects, some seemingly trivial, for he considered 
nothing and nobody too insignificant for his close attention and 
advice. 

My own father counted amongst bis close friends many remarkable 
persons from different parts of the world-statesmen, writers, philosophers, 
scientists, etc. He also was truly a teacher, conveying in simple language 
the vast canvas of life-politics, economics, science, foreign _policy-eyen to 
unlettered villagers. He wanted them to see these problems in a larger 
perspective, be imbued with a scientific temper and move towards modernity 

while keeping their feet firmly on Indian soil. 
Mahatma Gandhi had said : 

In this he followed what 

"I do not want my house to be walled in on all sides and my windows 
I want the cultures of all lands to be blown about my 
to be stuffed. 
house as freely as possible. But I refuse to be blown off my feet by 
any." 

A vast expanse of land and sea separates India and Fiji. Yet we are 
joined by strands not only of the racial memories of those who left our 
shores for yours many years ago but by the problems which all developing 
countries share. 

India, as you know, was one of the early cradles of human civilization 
and one of the very few lands where there has been a continuity of history 
. over the millennia. . The ancient Mesopotamian, Egyptian, Greek and 
. Roman civilizations faded away while the Indian (and the Chinese when they 
are not rejecting their past) have shown persistence. The Vedas and t1ie 
Upanishads are acclaimed as being amongst· the earliest fruits of man's 
speculative thought. 

inhabitants. 

Ancient India had comn1erce and contacts with all parts of the then 
Indian seals are found in Egypt and Babylonia; Indian words 
known world. 
in Greek plays, and Roman coins in Southern India. Mobility brought in 
new ideas, new products and new peoples. Only a portion of India's 
population consists of the descendants of original 
Indian 
history is a cavalcade of people from various parts of the world coming in 
and settling down, making India their home, learning some of the 
local 
customs but retaining many of their own characteristics and habits. This 
accounts for the wonderful, ifbaffiing, diversity of India in which the guiding 
spirit has been tolerance of letting the other person be himself, pursue his 
own culture and worship his own gods. You could call India the great 
salad bowl as against melting pot as the United States describes itself. India 
did not want its people to abandon their identity, to acquire a single language 
or a single religion. The ethnic personality of groups cannot and need not 
be obliterated, nor does unity need uniformity. 
In India, we have long 
recognized that diversity can be a source of strength-even as an alloy is 
stronger than the original elements. 

In the fifth century India, there was an exciting world of warriors, 
scholars, traders, poets and painters-a land dotted with universities which 
attracted students from various parts of the world, and crisscrossed with 
Its sculptors could carve 
safe and peaceable roads a thousand miles long. 
on stone the ineffable peace of the Buddha. 
India's metalsmiths produced 
from their crucible the rustless steel of the pillar which stands in Delhi 
defying the elements. So many centuries ago the poet Kalidasa beautifully 

EDUCA'tjON AND CULTURE 

and wisely pointed out what the world has just begun to realize-that man 
reaches his full stature only when he accepts the dignity and worth of life that 
is not human. 

To this land, which was the fountain of Hinduism, Buddhism and 
Jainism, came Christianity within a few years of Christ's death and 
Zoroastrianism and Islam in the seventh century. Muslim scholars and 
warriors brought with them the scientific and philosophical dynamism 
of the resurgent Islamic world. By interacting with earlier Indian traditions, 
it led to new achievements in every branch of life. But in succeeding 
centuries, no new knowledge was added. Education became stagnant, 
guarded by a small elite which closed its mind not only to streams from 
outside but even to the creative skills of different strata of its own society. 

But each epoch bears the seed of its own end. We had a long, hard 
struggle for our freedom. It was unique because it was non-violent, without 
hatred or bitterness, .and because it involved vast numbers of men and 
women .of towns and village~. · Although the aim was political .· independence, · 
we were keenly consdous that this had to be . accompanied by social and 
economic transformation and intellectual regeneration. 

Our leaders also knew that once India became independent, the whole 
structure of imperial domination of the world would crumble. In fact, that 
is what happened. 

India became politically independent in 194 7 but the process of national 
cleansing is continuing. Ouriconstitutional system is one of participatory 
democracy with special safeguards to ensure adequate representation for 
traditionally disadvantaged groups. Our edu.cational system, with its 
emphasis on science and technology, on the schooling of girls and 
the 
children of backward classes, and our development strategy with its 
program1nes for self-reliant growth and the uplift of backward groups and 
regions, have gradually brought about important changes in the economic, 
technological and social life of India. Today, India is regarded among the 
first ten countries of the world in tel1US of the volume atid sophistication 
of its industrial production. 
Its scientists and engineers have built solid 
foundations of technological and agricultural self-reliance. 

Education and development are intimately connected. 

In the first 
decade of this century, Sweden, which now has a remarkably high per capita 
income, was among the poorest in Europe. Japan, only a century ago so 
backward, is today among the foremost in industry. Sweden at least has 
mineral endowments; Japan hardly any. 
Its phenomenal progress and 
national prosperity are the outcome of the skill of its people. Whether you 
take Japan or Sweden or a large number of other advanced nations, human 
resource devel-0pment through education led 
to the development of 
indigenous natural resources or the setting up of industries based upon 
imported raw materials. The spread of knowledge was thus the first step 
in creating wealth and sharing it. 

We :find that much of the economic progress of nations since the 
Industrial Revolution was based on the use. of coal and oil. Both are 
exhaustible sources of fuel and are being burnt up at a furious pace. The 
fear of their total depletion has propelled science to look for fuel sources 
which are renewable as also more widely distributed. 
In the not so distant 
future, thus, nations need not probably be so dependant upon geographical 
accidents or on 1nilitary power to command the materials required for 
human welfare. Human ingenuity is harnessing the sun and the wind. 
Education becomes even more important for the economically backward. 
It is their key to welfare and progress. 

The young men and women of developing countries are sometimes 
dazzled by the glitter of affi.uent nations and the large opportunities there for 
learning and earning. Even India, which has established a string of 
advanced centres of research has not been able to hold all its talented youth. 
It has 
:Every year we lose hundreds 9f them to the advanced countries. 
been said that under the guise of providing training, the advanced countries 
have become inheritors to some of the best talent of developing countries ... 
Yet we are glad to see that many of our outstanding people have resisted 
those temptations and, at considerable sacrifice, decided to remain within 
the country, devoting their energies to the service and upliftment of our 
people. 

In old societies, the accent was on obligations and responsibilities; in 
the new, it is on opportunities and rights. Education uncovers possibilities 
and modern communications give instant news of accomplishment elsewhere. 
Both sharpen expectations. Young people, even social systems which 
emphasise corporate life as opposed to the individualistic, are now 
accustomed to thinking in terms of personal advantage. Yet, barring the 
n1ost egotistic, everyone recognises certain responsibilities to others, to 
family; to clan, to nation, to humanity at large. 

There need be no contradiction between nationalism an<± internationa-

lism. 
Indeed, an enduring international order can only be built on the basis 
of strong and self-reliant nations. The best people have found satisfaction 
in serving society and being involved in larger causes. 

This needs individuals, specially young people, who are self-confident 
I should like to conclude with my favourite poem of 

and self-reliant. 
Rabindranath Tagore, which is very apposite : 

Where the mind is without fear and 

the head is held high; 
Where lmowledge is free; 
Where the world has not been broken up into fragments 

--by narrow domestic walls; 

Where words come out from the depth of truth; 
Where tireless striving stretches its arms towards perfection; 

BDUCAT~ON AND CULTURE 

Where the clear stream of reason has not lost 

its way into the dreary desert sand of dead habit; 

Where the mind is led forward by thee into 
ever widening thought and action-

Into that heaven of freedom, 
My father, let my country awake. 

Role of a University 
I THANK THE University of Sofia for this high honour. This gesture deepens 
my personal feelings for Bulgaria and also strengthens the silken bond of 
goodwill between our two peoples. 

Late in· the eighteenth century, the affinity between the languages ·of · 
Em;ope and of India was discovered, unfolding new vistas in historical 
studies. Just before I left India, a leading Inci.ologist told me of · tb.e 
numerous similarities in the vocabularies of your· language· and Sanskrit. 
The very name of your President is cognate with the Sanskrit word jiva, 
which means 'life'. 

The Thracian and Indian peoples were both well known around the 
ancient world. The national anthem of Bulgaria sings of the sun shining 
over Thrace. Writing about Thracians, the forbears of the Bulgarians, 
Herodotus has said : "The Thracians are the second biggest people after the 
Indians. Were they ruled by one master and were they unanimous, they 
. could have been," in my opinion, invincible and stronger than all other 
peoples." The word Thrace itself implies courage and heroism. Not many 
written records of the Thracians have survived. But we have seen the 
remarkably beautiful exhibition .of early Thracian art treasures which gave 
a glimpse of the magnificence that was your history. At your national 
university, I should like to express my deep appreciation of your nation's 
contribution to human heritage. 

Universities stand for the unity and universality of knowledge and their 
eternal relevance to life. Universities are not merely buildings, libraries or 
laboratories. Nor even places for the getting 
together of scholars of 
different generations, those who transmit knowledge and those who acquire 
it in a common quest. 
In every university there are unseen generations : 
all who have passed through its portals and those who will come thereafter. 
A university is a vinculum which connects the past and the future of 
all humanity. 

Speech after receiving the degree of Doctor of Laws (honor is causa) at the Sofia University, 
Sofia, Bulgaria, Novembex 7, 1981 

The function of universities, it is said, is to urge inquiry and try to expose 
and eliminate error by the meeting of mind with mind, and knowledge with 
knowledge. The discoveries made in places of advanced learning and the 
lamps that are lit there expel darkness for all. As power generated in a 
powerhouse is for the whole community, knowledge generated wihin a 
university is for general use of all humanity. 

In our country, we had a vivid example. When we increased the number 
of agricultural colleges and established a chain of agricultural universities, 
our farmers at first showed scepticism doubting the efficacy of and utility 
to their own farms of the new agricultural techniques and crop varieties and 
the higher yields thereby obtained, because the experiments were made in 
special and controlled conditions. 

This attitude was sho1t-lived. Now even illiterate farmers visit 
universities to discuss their special interests with scientists and attain new 
skills and insights which contribute . to our agricultural growth. 
In fact, 
· many universities have hostels where farmer;, come to stay for short periods. • 
St. Cyril, who developed the. script of your language, is said to have 
· reinarked that people are naked without books. Books are indeed symbols · 
of knowledge. At 
·they were stored in memory and 
transmitted from generation to generation by word of mouth. Then came 
writing, and with the invention of printing, access to knowledge spread vastly. 
Literacy is important to make people less dependant and to give entry to the 
wonderful world of the written word. And books open out vast vistas, 
enabling us to make acquaintance with people and ideas which we could 
otherwise never reach. 

the beginning; 

But let us not 

imagine that literacy is necessarily the only key to 
intelligence or the development of personality. We have had ample 
experience of our own people, even though many of them are unlettered. 
Through calamity and stress, in peace and in war, they have often displayed 
qualities of understanding and of courage that were found wanting in many 
others. They were the backbone' of our struggle for independence, as they 
are today of our struggle for economic regeneration, increasing through the 
sweat of their brow our agricultural and industrial production. Not only are 
they keenly aware of their own local matters, but also of larger issues. 
Perhaps, one reason is their closeness to the earth and the oral tradition which 
remains so integral part of their everyday lives. They have a vibrant 
cultural literature all their own, spontaneous i.u the creation of village 
songs and plays and in their folk dances. What are now regarded as 
handicrafts were not artefacts for decoration, but utility articles which the 
craftsman's instinctive feeling for line and colour transformed into things of 
beauty. They have a non-verbal articulation which is compellingly 
eloquent. Tradition-bound as they are in many respects, once convinced 
they do not hesitate to jettison old customs and to adopt and adapt new 
methods and tools. 

But, of course, we cannot afford to neglect literacy and education. 
Both the programmes are important for development. We have expanded. 
education considerably: I 06 million children are in schools and three million 
students in colleges. What won::ies us now is how to make education more 
relevant to contemporary challenges and expectations and a much more 
effective instrument for social change. 

In many countries, so-called modernity has introduced a dichotomy 
between the educated and the unschooled, and between work and art. This 
has led to a decline in people's creativity. The mass market and the mass 
media, which are concomitants of'progress', as it is understood, give currency 
to standardised stereotyped consumption goods. Technology does reduce 
drudgery, but it also reduces joy and the poise and self-assurance that come 
with personal involven1ent and contribution. A great part of the stress and 
. dissatisfaction of contemporary life is because art and joy have become 
leisure-time activities to be pursued rather than a natural part of all our 
activities. They are no longer integral but extra.. In processing food, 
nutritious elements are lost. This is true .of technology as .a :whole. It is · 
our endeavourtci ensure that economic development and modernization do 
not hurt our handicraft traditions as has happened elsewhere in the wake of 
the Industrial Revolution; through forethought and systematic planning, 
such a loss can be avoided. 

I am glad that the socialist countries have taken so much trouble to 
conserve their folk dance, folk song and folk art. 
In this respect we have 
much to learn from Bulgaria. Art and n1usic and all beauty, whether 
fashioned by man or nature, are important and indispensable elements in the 
enhancing of the quality of life. 

for preserving 

Universities are or should be pathmakers for cultural conservation 
the wholeness of personality. The process of 
and 
discrimination, of choosing the necessary and the worthy, while rejecting 
the bad, whether old or new, is a continuous one. Universities are expected 
to work in the frontier areas of knowledge. The human heart, the human 
sensibility are also frontier areas; and men and women of learning should 
never lose touch with them. 

In India, true people's poet and saint was Kabir of the 14th century. 
He was one of the first of the modems to write in the people's dialect. He 
wrote : "I laugh when I hear that the fish in the water is thirsty", meaning 
It is to be 
that we do not have to wander about looking for the truth. 
found within each one of us. 

The deeper search is necessary to unravel the paradox of our times. 
New discoveries and scientific advances are showing the way. The world 
as a whole has the knowledge and capacity to deal with age-old problems. 
But we find that in some places there is over-abundance and waste while 
others suffer from shortages and want. Far from bringing satisfaction, 
we sometimes find that affluence often breeds greed and discontent, and 

many new problems are created. How can we regenerate the springs of 
hope and enthusiasm so that young and old of all races and nationalities 
can come together in a common endeavour? The better and more fulfilling 
world and all noble causes such as peace, human brotherhood and equality 
today depend on the harnessing of the strength and energy of which we 
are all capable of. From the dream and work of today will emerge the 
reality of brighter tomorrow. 

Towards a New Synthesis in Civilization 
·r O llE IN FRANCE, the home of freedom and the fount of SO much of 

humankind's philosophical, aesthetic and scientific creativity is a privilege. 
To receive a degree from the Sorbonne is honour exceptional; for this . 
University is synonymous with intellectual daring and excellence. 
I take · 
this to be a tribute not to me but to the culture and civilization of which 
I am a product. 

The reputation of India's spiritualism has been so widely prevalent 
that the sturdiness of its intellectual tradition is often overlooked. Old 
Indian thought has been described as "Freedo1n Intoxicated"-freedom 
here signifying release of the spirit from involvement in matter. But there 
was no lack of emphasis on the reality of the world. There was an aggressive 
intellectuality about our scriptures. They did not give in to escapism. 
They emphasised a happier life in this world. 

Ancient India took intuition as the highest form of the intellect. But 
so far as it held the ground, the intellectual process was incisive, unsparing 
and all-inclusive. The quest was marked by depth, not merely breadth. 
There was hardly any field of knowledge which was not explored minutely. 
Its sweep extended from the most minute to the grandest, and making the 
knower realize how much he did not know. 

Down the centuries there have been lively debates on the nature of 
reality and disputations between deists and non-deists. In fact, two of India's 
great religions, Buddhism and Jainism, are non-deistic. The idealist Vedanta 
has attracted wide notice, not so well known are our old materialist schools 
like the Lokyata and the Sankhya which pursued relentless logic. The 
biologist Haldane, atheist and humanist, considered Sankhya a system in 
which the most modem scientist could feel at home. 

Speech after receiving the degree of Doctor of Laws (hooorls causa) at. the Sorbonne 
University, Paris, November 12, 1981 

It has been the crucible in which different narrow elements fused, gaining 
It was able to transcend, 
energy and capacity for pliant investigation. 
yet hold the material world of the outer and the religious world of the inner. 
An ancient' text says: "There is One, but it is perceived variously". 

· The Indian intellect has valued not only belief but doubt. "Philosophical 
argument," wrote an early thinker, "can have no relevance for that which 
It has relevance only for 
is totally unknown or that which is fully known. 
that about which there is some doubt." Such was the flexibility of the best 
of Indian thought. 

Louis Renou notes the attention which Indian thinking gave to develop 
methods of analysis and exposition, to established classifications, definitions 
and a precise technical vocabulary. Numerous were the subjects which 
the Indian intellect probed with thoroughness much before others began 
to think of them-politics, economics, astronomy, mathematics; chemistry, 
medicine, psychology, logic, phonetics, etc. Gran1mar and with it linguistics 
was regarded as one of the most important of the sciences. Panini of 3rd 
century B:C. used dialect, folklore and local customs as his data.· .. 
. Already in the tenth century the remarkable Arab scholar Al0Berrini, 
who wrote about the state of Indian science arid philosophy, commented 
that Indian scholars had lost much of their inquisitiveness and had developed 
a certain intellectual complacency. So overladen became the palimpsest 
of myths, legends and rituals that my father wrote of the 'Burden of the Past' 
quoting Nietzche's lament, "Not only the wisdom of centuries, also their 
madness breaketh out in us. Dangerous is it to be an heir". 

Colonial powers ridiculed the cultures, languages, the clothing and 
customs of their colonies. And we ourselves chose, or were induced, to 
forget who and what we were. Because our rulers needed administrators, 
professionals and workers, they introduced some education to produce 
cogs for the imperial wheel; but there was no way to stop other concepts 
from seeping in too, and we eagerly grasped ideas like the rights of man 
which arose in France and became the banner of European enlightenment. 
Thirsty for ideas and for more complete freedom, questing spirits in our 
country were attracted by the daring of the statement, "I think, therefore, 
I am". They compared it to the ancient Indian observation "I am that 
which is" (tattvamasi), which J. Krishnamurthi has put in contemporary 
language: "The thinker and the thought are one". 

While European scholars were discovering the East, our own liberation 
was helped by their incisive reasoning. Traditional concept of East and 
I refer not to the political or military blocs but to 
West are now obsolete. 
cultures and civilizations and the sense in which Kipling used the words. 
The twain have not only met but are the warp and woof of the human fabric. 
Change is continuous and accelerating. Neither individual nor country 
can be contained within a label for long. We may be Indian, French or 
whatever, but :first we are human with urges and aches which are -basically 

The new 

technologies of communicating 

similar, howsoever different the outside packaging. Even the most 'Indian' 
of our great personalities like Rabindranath Tagore (1861-1941), Mahatma 
Gandhi (1869-1948) and Shri Aurobindo (1872-1950) were amalgams of East 
and West. Mahatma Gandhi's extraordinary power as a political leader 
was due as much to W estem jurisprudence and legal logic as to Eastern 
intuition and ascetic idiom. Where else but in India could a terrorist 
revolutionary like Sri Aurobindo change into a revolutionary of the spirit? · 
Many in the West, alienated by the acquisitive society, have been turning 
to the East for spiritual light; even as the young in our countries look westward 
dazzled by its glitter. A barter trade of deceptions, this spiritualism is 
no more a consumer good than is technology. Each has to be internalised 
through a dedicated period of self. discipline what we in India call tapas, 
yoga, which is essentially a discipline-physical, mental and spiritual control. 
ideas and implanting 
impressions demand a new kind of individual who n1ust relate to the universal 
society rather than the circumstantial community. The new 'Earth Citizen' 
· cannot. deny his or her local provenance like language, songs and dance; 
. special epics or legends, but should be equally able to dtawfroni other sources 
of experience. The present crisis of civilization is not so niuch the clash . 
of cultures as what to do with violence, not only that which is stored in 
nuclear arsenals but the growing and pointless violence of ordinary people 
In the last few centuries, under the impetus of the 
and their callousness. 
Industrial Revolution, 
industry and professions have 
concentrated on what is called 'efficiency'. Greater consumption but less 
satisfaction, which was the problem of the affluent individual throughout 
history, has now become the problem of entire countries. Education, 
the purpose of which was originally to enable the individual to co1ne to terms 
with life, often unsettles balance. 
It is education for efficiency not for 
harmony. The educated are unable to reconcile the 'two cultures,' the 
humanities and sciences, and still less to assimilate them within their 
distinctive · inner personalities. Progress has dried· 
the springs of 
spontaneity. 

governments, 

As knowledge grows, so does ignorance. Not only is there too much 
to know but, lost in statistics and masses of information, we miss the real 
In a more confident age, it was the French 
meaning or ultimate purpose. 
who thought of encompassing the whole corpus of knowledge in an 
In spite of the revolution in communications, access to 
encyclopaedia. 
significant knowledge is tenuous. When we consider this, we can only 
marvel at the providence which keeps the world going. Now more than 
ever we miss and seek the grand synthesis. So many are in search of masters 
or gurus for guidance. But the truth lies within ourselves and each has to 
discover it for himself. 

Proliferating knowledge calls for constant sifting and selection. But 
who has the time or the- desire? --we over-simplify situations, attaching 

EDUCAT~ON AND CULTURE 

labels to and shoving people and ideas into pigeon-holes, clinging to 
stereotypes. 

Rapid transforn1ations have enabled some human beings to escape 
the gravity of the Earth, to look down upon its roundness as actuality. 
This view of cosmic totality should have broken all divisions and jolted us 
beyond our limited horizons. Yet, the sense of wholeness evades us as 
does the realization that man is one tiny element in the cosmos and that 
It 
all life and nature are interrelated and no element can isolate itself. 
is chastening to remember that long before these modern experiences, 
Teilhard de Chardin, one of France's great thinkers, had called the universe 
'the great indivisible'. The ancient Indian concept, the essence of Vedanta, 
is to see things as they are, to see being as one and indivisible; life and 
death; pleasure laced with pain; body, mind and spirit-all so intricately 
entwined as to be inseparable and for ever reacting to one another. As 
body needs space to breathe and exist, so does the mind or spirit, call it 
what you will, needs space inside, space to think and space to 1:,e all of 
oneself. 

How is it that human.kind can reach out for .the stars but find& too . 
complex the challenges· of in.equality, expanding population., · technological 
advancement and deployment of energy; to say nothing of nursilig mother 
Earth to a greater productivity? 

Until now history has been the record of conflicts between races and 
nations, of the break-up of social structures, of growing distance from life-
sustaining source. We lead divided lives as individuals, citizens, classes, 
professions, ethnic groups, nationalities; even as a species. Our sensibilities 
are fragmented by the different roles we are called upon to play. The 
integral quality of a person at home with himself and society is lost. How 
to reconcile our material and spiritual needs, our cognitive and instinctive 
experience, our aesthetic and moral sensibility, is the question. few of us 
ever ask. Living and functioning in giant organizational networks, the 
individual has disappeared in the civic in.termesh, uncertain, of will, autonomy, 
identity. The solace of established religion and the security of social 
tradition no longer suffice. · 

Words change their meaning or disappear from our vocabulary; and 
the mind negates dimensions of the ethos. Whether the person moves 
inward into the divided self or outward in.to the divided world, the nightmare 
of a vast estranging structure closes in, causing alienation and in.coherence. 
There is no sense of sanctity towards life or relation with Nature; to human 
beings of all races. Goodness is not assumed as a state that is untainted, 
the :flowering of which determines the texture of a culture or civilization.. 
Nor is the feeling of compassion, that abounding fulness, that does not 
diminish in the giving. 

Biologists tell us that we use only an infinitesimal portion of our brain. 
The rest remains unexplored. Perhaps this is one reason for our limitations. 

The new adventurers have to be investigators with latetal as well as vertical 
vision to stretch the frontiers of their awareness. We must have new 
priorities, the capacity to observe, to think, to act with sympathy and strength. 
This action of the total brain may be the intelligence that will transcend 
barriers and bring perceptions of life and the world as an organic whole. 
To have order without, there has to be order within. 

The world of science is investigating the ground from which all life 
springs. The tremendous discoveries taking place in bio-genetic sciences 
are bringing man to the threshold of new comprehension of life, just as 
yesterday's discoveries in physics erased the dividing line between the within 
and the without. Wise people had always known that the observer is the 
participator; now the quantum physicist confirms it. Man is not a mere 
observer of outer phenomena but a participator. 

The modern child apparently has an inbuilt understanding which 
was denied to us. Belonging as I do to the older generation, I have not 
lost my sense of wonder at each new discovery. Not just for comfort and 
speed or even to· solve problems, but to reject the evils of earlier periods, . 
in short, to transform the Earth and to uplift the human race to higher levels. 
· So, science must march on, and man must keep pace. There must be clear 
· recognition of the needs of people and the will to take action to satisfy them. 
Without the banks on either side there can be no river. Science and 
technology can be of benefit when controlled and used properly and with 
discrimination. Needless to say, I do not consider the stockpiling of lethal 
nuclear weapons as a proper use and I share the concern of Europe on this 
issue. We have killed and died for the absurd. If and when nuclear weapons 
are used, it might well turn out to be on some trivial provocation and the 
innocent would.probably be the one to be first annihilated. 

Consciousness of the grave danger of nuclear war is growing. 

It is 
not less crucial to be aware of the equal threat posed by disparities within 
and between countries. On the positive side, there is the necessity for deeper 
anxiety for the growth of the human personality., The wholeness of the 
Earth can come about only with the wholeness of the human being. 

Man has attempted and achieved the impossible. We look to centres 
of learning, and especially to prestigious institutions like the Sorbonne, 
to dispel darkness and to illuminate the path of the future. 

and 

The· Mass Media 

Art-Integral to Life 
IN ALL ANCIENT societies, music and dance were much a part of daily life, 
deeply rooted in religion which permeated all activities. No occasion of 
joy or sorrow was complete without them. The arts were an integral part 
of society and there were inter-actions between different art disciplines. 
It 
is said that when a student went to learn sculpture, he was told to first study 
architecture. But to learn architecture, he had to know music and to know 
music, he had to study poetry. 

individual can· be divided 

interlinked? Neither life nor an 

In society as a whole, this inter-relation has gone, although still found 
amongst some of our great artists and scientists. Aren't all aspects of life 
so 
into 
compartments. Each part opens out to the other and many overlap~ With 
the initial advance of .science, specialization and superficial materialistic 
way of thought pointed in the opposite direction. Personally, I had always 
rejected the view thaf science and religion or spirituality, if you would rather 
call it that, were irreconcilable. Now the wheel is coming full circle again. 
The discoveries· of eminent scientists have upset confirmed notions and 
modern physics has a new philosophical outlook. Amaury de Riencourt 
writes: "One cannot always distinguish between statements made by Eastern 
metaphysics based on mystical insight and pronouncements of modern 
physics based on experiments, observations and mathematical calculations." 
The very first nuclear explosion unleashed great technological powers and 
In 
also various violent 
Oppenheimer's recitation of a famous shloka from the Gita at that point 
of time, de Riencourt notes a significant symbolism observing, "Nowhere 
in Western literatv:re could he have found an almost clinical description of 
mystical rapture that also fl.ts the description of a nuclear explosion in the 
outer world." 

instincts which man has learnt to suppress. 

There can be no civilization without music, dance and art; for, one is 
not fully, vibrantly alive without them. But it is a sad commentary on 
contemporary civilization that what had fl.owed so spontaneously, so full 
of the celebration of life, and even death as an inseparable part of life, should 
today be an extra something for which one has to strive and, for people like 
me, to make time with difficulty. 

The artist should be free; yet there never was a time when he was truly 
In tribal days; he had to conform to rituals and taboos. Later came 
free. 
the age of patronage. Today, he is pursued by critics and views of opinion 

Speech at the inauguration of the Tata Auditorium at the National Centre for Perfomtlng 
Arts, Bombay, October 11, 1980 

makers. Corbusier advises the artists: "Your work must flow from your 
own convictions and instincts, not from the desire to please, not from the 
desire to shock. 
In following your path, you must be prepared to face 
as opponents, not only the philistines, but also your own friends, not only 
older generations but also your own." 

The artiste looks to the government for help and yet resents it. With 
our multifarious problems, the role of government can only be a limited one. 
It is organizations like this National Centre for Performing Arts must 
fill the gap and give enlightened patronage. The government and the 
voluntary effort should both be involved. Perhaps the time has come for 
the government to evaluate its policies and work for artistes and, if so 
required, redefine its priorities. 

We, in India, are proud of our heritage and can be equally proud of 
our present-day musicians. But how many people have the privilege and 
pleasure of h~aring and seeing them? Many more than in earlier days, 
but still it is a minuscule proportion of our people; Something must be 
done to bring the average citizen closer to this wealth of beauty of 111ovemynt 
and of sound. 
It is also necessary to encourage our budding young artistes 
and give them opportunities for learning and performing. 

We need to preserve the pristine purity of the traditional but we also 
need new ideas; new combinations and original interpretation and conceptions. 
The Centre for Performing Arts could be a valuable catalyst in creating a 
meaningful bridge between tradition and modernity. The Centre is a worth-
while addition to our cultural life. . I have no doubt that its influence and 
value will extend beyond Bombay, enthusing our artistes and our 
people. 

How does a centre become national? Not by any label attached 

to 
it, but by making itself a meetin'g point of the many streams which have 
made our culture the many-splendoured thing it is. 

, At the moment, the Centre has elitist air about it. 

I hope you will 
work out a new concept of protocol and a new way of establishing who is· 
If the Centre is to serve the purposes, it is intended to serve, 
important. 
It must give to the great creative 
it must not remain an island of opulence. 
artistes of India the feeling that the Centre belongs to them and they to the 
Centre. 

The Centre has taken up many activities and has drawn up a program.me 
interesting and also useful for the preservation and 
of work which is 
development of the arts. Centres, such as this, can flourish and attract 
good audiences only when popular interest is aroused and sustained. The 
philosopher,C.E.M.Joad, said: "Good taste is not instinctivebut acquired. 
It grows slowly through the effort to understand what is beyond us, through 
It depends 
the endeavour to appreciate what we cannot yet understand. 
on our willingness to be bored with what is good in order that we 1nay become 
bored with what is bad and so demand something better." 

ARTS AND THE MASS MED~ 

There are different ways of doing this. In the Soviet Union, where prices 
are entirely controlled by the government, classical music and classical 
literature used to be sold much cheaper than popular music and novels. 
To be allowed to attend a concert, an opei;a or a ballet was a special privilege 
bestowed on those whom the State wished to honour. Before the Second 
World War, Britain was regarded as an unmusical country. But during 
the war, the government arranged free concerts in the lunch hour and people, 
who had never before bothered about music, went to them as a relaxation 
from the continuous strain of the bombings and other dangers and hardships. 
The best musicians performed in halls as well as in odd places, and little by 
little appreciation was built up and London grew into an important centre 
for good music. 

\Vhat does one seek fr0111 art? A few hours of pleasure or an 
·. experience which has the seed of timelessness that touches one's inner-most 
self? 
In all things, however ·fleeting, there is a part of eternity waiting to 
he recognised and enshrined in memory. 
It is the sum total of such 
· experiences that makes for the richness-of the human personality. 

To all those connected with the National Centre for the Performing. 
Arts, _to the Centre itself and its future work, I give n1y good wishes. We 
expect 1nuch from it. 

Our Musical Tradition 
HAD IT NOT been foi:. my interest in 1nusic and the arts long before coming 

to Delhi, I would have said that it is not in spite of my pre-occupations and 
burdens but because of them that I have to take a continuing.interest in 
all these other activities. 
I have said time and again that I have believed, 
I do not know whether anybody -ever told me this or taught me this or it 
was something that came from within-· the oneness of life. It is something 
that I have felt very deeply and something about which I talk continuously. 
But I have a special relationship with museums, and I think my own 
education, such of it as I have, has been far more through visiting the great 
museums of the world, in London, Paris, Munich and so on, than any of the 
several schools I .attended. Perhaps it is not known and I think even my 
father's biographers have not touched on the subject, that of his great 
devotion to museums and, I must admit that I did not always appreciate 
'\Vherever we went, even when I was eight and a half, I was packed off 
it. 

Speech dedicating to the nation the Smt~ Sharan Rani Backliwal Gallery of Musical 
Instruments, National Museum, New Delhi, October 30, 1980 

to museums while 1ny father and mother were doing other things, and I was 
told that this is what I must see there and tell them about it and so on. 
So, I have had a special attraction to museums and of the role they can play 
in developing a person and a country. 

Our National Museum is a treasure-house and window of our culture. 
It shows us how we came to be what we are and to take pride in our heritage. 
To outsiders, it should give a true understanding of our country's spirit and 
soul; how much of it is rooted in the past and how the past lives on in 
the present. 

In the National Museum, formal arts are naturally given greater 
prominence as records and objects of our golden ages and the more dazzling 
epochs. But, for a more complete understanding, articles of everyday use 
give a picture of the lives of ordinary people and we are amazed to see the 
high level of artistry, the instinctive feel for texture, for design, for line and 
colour. And that is the base which sustains us all. The objects in a 
national museum are living objects: the Yakshas and the dancing Shivas, 
the Harappa pots arid pans, and the illustrated Ramayana and Koran 
manuscripts and the tribal artefacts that Verrier Elwin and others so lovingly 
collected. 

Our musical tradition is one of our richest heritage. And it is now 
captivating audiences abroad also. The secret of its vitality, as of our dance 
and drama, is the continuous borrowing from the regional and folk modes. 
The names of many ragas point to this. The great river of Indian music 
is fed by numerous streams which arise in the hills and forests of 
various regions of India. Hence, its amazing strength and breadth of 
appeal. 

. There was a time when classical art needed the patronage of court or 
chiJrch to fl6urish. But folk art has always lived in the hearts of common 
folk and it has persisted long after dynasty after dynasty has passed into 
history. 

The musical instruments which are being displayed today are a tribute 
to the perenniality of Indian music. Smt. Sharan Rani has lovingly collected 
them from different parts of our country over many years, devoting care and 
It is generous of her to give them to the nation. Her gesture is 
time. 
deeply appreciated. 

I am delighted to be associated also with the release of Smt. Pupul 
It has had to face many obstacles 
Jayakar's book, The Earthen Drum. 
before seeing the light of the day and I have followed some of these steps. 
The drum is the most universal of all musical instruments, not only for 
music but also for sending messages of peace and war in all parts of the world. 
In our tradition, it has been the primeval source of the Vedas and of all 
music. 
I have always looked at the drum as the symbol of the Earth itself, 
for the Earth -provides the rhythm by which we live. All life is born of the 
soil and water that forms the Earth crust, from the air that envelopes it 

ARTS AND THll MASS MEDIA 

and the Sun that warms and lights it. All life and all art must arise from 
the Earth and aspire towards the Sun and the stars. 

I spoke earlier of the unity of life. We see that even 

the most 
life and arts have t1ie primitive within them. We may 
sophisticated 
acknowledge it or we may not, but we cannot really deny its existence. Smt. 
Jayakar's book brings out this intimate connection between the common 
and uncommon, between the local and the universal, between the rain and 
the sea. She deals with the roots of Indian art and the relation between the 
classical and the rural. She shows how the cradle of art is the life of the 
people. We know that each individual has within him many people, 
including artist. 

The old limitations of tradition of ritual and taboo nevertheless seem 
to give more freedom to this artist within, whereas today's freedom although 
opening out many new opportunities has not really succeeded in loosening 
• the artistic spirit of man, but quite often of throttling it. I have known Smt. 
Jayakar since my childhood. She was then a friend of other members 
of my family; and we did not n1eet for long years in between.· But she has · 
given me new insight in various aspects of India's culture. 
I know that· 
her book will do the same for a much wider audience opening vistas into the 
creative genius of our great land. 

Dr. Vatsyayan's association with our cultural activities is of many 
years. The Geet Govind is one of the great achievements of Sanskrit poetry 
celebrating a legend most dear to Indian imagination, the story of Krishna 
and Radha. Numerous philosophical meanings and metaphors have been 
read into it. In our tradition, there has been a constant effort to blend the 
sensuous and the spiritual, the physical and the metaphysical. Whether it 
is treated purely as poetry or as allegory, the Geet Govind is a life-enhancing 
work. It has inspired dance and song and is learnt and recited in all parts 
of the country, in Kerala no less than in Orissa and Bengal. 

I congratulate the National-Museum on organizing this Gallery of 
Musical Instruments and on publishing these two attractive, stimulating 
volumes. 
I dedicate the Gallery to the nation and I have pleasure in 
releasing the books. 

Vallathole and Kathakali 
IT IS INDEED a pleasure and privilege for me to preside over the golden 
jubilee celebrations of this great institution. We have just been reminded 
of my father's participation in your silver jubilee function. As he did then, 
so I ain here today to salute Kerala on behalf of the nation for preserving 
and fostering Kathakali, one of the most profound, powerful and colourful 
art forms of our country. 

Such was our ignorance of the treasure of our country and so clouded 
was our vision with the impact of outside influence that not so long ago, 
people outside Kerala knew little of Kathakali. Of course, this was also 
true of the different art forms of the other parts of the country. But our 
great poets Tagore and Vallathole opened our eyes to our proud national 
heritage and took action to make known the artistic wealth ofeach region . 
to other parts. At a different level, Uday Shankar and Rukriuni Devi were 
pioneers to stage such performances in India and abroad. 
In all the world literature, there is little to surpass the Mahabharat and 
the Ramayan for the scale and intensity of passion. And Kathakali does 
full justice to these two epics. The costumes and the gestures which have 
been evolved by known and unknown artists and dramatists of this region 
can only be called inspired, for they bring out the grandeur of the epic 
characters-the gods as well as the demons. 
It is truly a people's art giving 
the common man as well as the elite an appreciation of the highest levels 
of formal classical art. 

We speak today of non-formal education and continuing education. 
For centuries, Kathakali has provided Kerala with a system of continuing 
education as have ·our epics all over the country. Once seen, Kathakali 
can never be forgotten. We came to the brink of tragedy, for, even such 
It was Vallathole who not only 
a living form was in danger of fading out. 
preserved it but awakened the world's interest in it. 
I have the privilege 
of knowing him and, though not being familiar with Malayalam or its poetry, 
I could not appreciate his poetic genius; I was struck by the quality of the 
man. He wrote on a variety of subjects. 
I believe, one of his epic poems 
is on Mary of Magdalen which shows his great open-mindedness. 

I remember just at this moment, specially, his deep hun1an feeling. 
Once, many years ago, I accompanied my father to Ernakulam. Vallathole 
It was late at 
had arranged a Kathakali performance there on the sands. 
night and I rushed upstairs to put 1ny sons, who were then very small, to 

Inaugural speech at the golden jubilee celebrations of the Kerala Kalamandalarn, 
Trivandrum, November 10, 1980 

ARTS AND THE MASS MED~A 

Keral.a has 1nany more performing arts. Mohini Attam with 

bed. But Vallathole rushed after them and made me get them out of bed. 
I shall always remember the wide-eyed wonder with which they sat in trance 
during the entire performance of the scene depicting the Narasimha Avatar. 
the 
sin1plicity, the purity of costume and the grace of 1novement, 
is gaining 
increasing popularity. Our temples have also other forms of mime and 
recitative dances. For all of them, the Kalamandalan1 is the main teaching 
and research centre. As a tribute to Vallathole and in appreciation of the 
creative genius of the people of Kerala, let us give full support to Kalaman-
dalam and ensure that it attracts the best teachers and students and spreads 
the influence of its work far and wide. 

I have great pleasure in declaring open the golden jubilee celebrations 
of the Kerala Kalamandalam, and my good wishes to all connected with it. 

Music Enhances Perception 
w HEN I SAW the title of this evening's lecture, the question arose in my 

mind: What did Jawaharlal Nehru have to do with music? The Nehrus are 
notoriously unmusical. 
In my childhood, practically , the only music I 
heard were national songs. On looking back one realizes how cliche-ridden 
they were and how often enough they were sung out of tune. But in those 
heady days, we found them soul-stirring, inspiring people. with action 
and sacrifice. Some were on Jawaharlal Nehru himself-prophetic too: 
Bharat ka danka aalam mein bajwa diya veer Jawahar nay (Jawaharlal has 
made India known all over the world). Those were the ones my grandmother 
cherished. 

:Tawaharlal Nehru was not musical, though he did sometimes 

find 
pleasure in music. But he loved Nature. And come to think ofit, Nature 
is awash with music. Most sounds, whether harmony or cacophony, are 
music. He loved bird songs, the gentle lapping of the waves on sand and 
the angry roar of the monsoon sea. 
I remember my own enjoyment of 
the myriad sounds in which the earth delights. A baby's first efforts at 
speech are music to the mother's ear. 

Perhaps man's drawing was his first word and his grunt his first attempt 
at music. Man has a compulsion to make things his own, to ape and to 
improve upon them. And what is more that he succeeds. He excelled 
himself in perfecting art and music as an offering to the divine. 

Speech inaugurating the Fourteenth Jawaharlal Nehru Memorial lecture by Dr Narayana 
Menon, a noted Indian musicologist, New Delhi, November 13, 1980 

Music and art are said to· speak a universal language. But this language 
can be understood only by people who are themselves univevsal in character, 
those who have broken out of the confines of their traditions and conventions . 
. We think of Tagore as a universal man. Yet, he is said to have confessed 
to Einstein, another universal man, "Somehow the piano confounds me." 
And Einstein replied, "The difficulty is that really good music, whether of 
the East or the West, calJ.llot be analysed." As most philosophers and 
now even physicists would agree, there never can be complete or satisfactory 
analysis. For, in analysing and probing, you disturb and alter the 
essence. 

Dr. Menon has a lively mind and he is devoted to music. I believe he 
will take us, uninitiated ones, on a journey or rather on random wanderings, 
not of a specialised descriptive account of musical forms but into the world 
of music, the rare realms of how music moves our minds and hearts. · What 
better way can there be of heightening our responses and of whetting our 
appetites to know more about this fascinating subject? 

. ·. Music itself is not merely sound; it _is colour and line, it is movement, 
it is pattern and desigu. 
It awakens feeling and at the same time. has the 
capacity to express emotion as no words can-emotions that can be 
compared to 'the white radiance' of which Shelley speaks. The. religious 
person turns to music to evoke the right atmosphere for worship. The 
soldier needs a martial tune to dispel the fatigue of dreary marches. Old 
folk seek it as a soothing balm for their nerves, and the young to soak in 
their energy, to cloak their shyness or to speak their love. 

Music is a wonderful ~release, a loosening and a freeing, an opening 
out to other experiences and sensations. Music gives a wholeness. 
It 
enhances our perceptions and deepens our awareness. To me, music 
echoes Lao Tse : "The wise man looks into space and does not regard the 
small as too little, nor the great as too big, for he knows that there is no 
limit to dimensions." 

Jawaharlal Nehru was a man of ever-widening dimensions and this, 

I think, was his link with music. 

Media and the Right to Privacy 
IT IS SAID that modern societies are information societies. Citizens tend 
to get interested in all fields of life and demand information 
that is as 
comprehensive, accurate and fair as possible. The idea of the right to 
thus come to be advanced. No right, however, is 
information has 
untrammelled. All rights are subject to certain well-recognized limits such 
as national security, decency and morality. These are set out in most 
constitutions of the world. But, as the power of governments and the reach 
of the media increase, the individual has to have some protection against 
them. Laws against libel and defamation are not · always an adequate 
safeguard. 
The right to privacy, long ago enunciated by Justice Brandeis, is now 
·. being increasingly recognizeci · · as an impo:rta~t personal right. Where · 
communication technology is tending to become all-pervasive, even intrusive, 
and. the wielders of the pen, the camera and the microphone more insistent 
there is need for self-restraint and professional norms of 
and tactless, 
behaviour have to be built up to protect individuals against harassment. 

Press Should Write for People 
A FEW YEARS ago, I had the privilege of inaugurating this building and 
paying homage to Lokamanya Tilak. Today, I have the privilege of saluting 
an institution which Lokamanya established a liundred years ago. Kesari 
means lion. 
It was founded by a lion of a man. His roar and Kesari's 
roar awakened the people and putnew heart into them. 

We are grateful to the Lokamanya for his triple message. The first 
is the message of independence, for, as everyone knows, 
it was he who 
proclaimed in ringing and rousing tones that Swaraj (independence) was 
our birthright. 

The second is the message of democracy. He was a man of the people. 
He prepared the people for the responsibilities of popular government. 

Message to the seminar organized by the All-India Newspaper Editors' Conference on 
the Interrelationship Between the Right to Information and the Right to Privacy, 
New Delhi, November 3, 1980 
Speech at centenary· celebrations of the newspapers Kesari and Mahratta, Pune, 
January 14, 1981 

He spoke the language of the people, rather taught the people how to speak 
their own language, and he built up people's institutions. Whether it is 
education, whether it is co:inmerce, whether it is rediscovery of our cultural 
sources or whether it is the encouragement of physical fitness, the landscape 
is dotted by institutions built up by Tilak. 

Tilak's third message is the message of selfless service. His own life 
was a saga of sacrifice and suffering-· sacrifice cheerfully made and suffering 
heroically endured. And, in spite of his eminence and the world's adulation, 
he remained simple and unassuming. 

Kesari, alongwithMahratta, was the means through which Tilak spread 
his message. During his lifetime it was a weekly. Kesari and Mahratta 
and the weeklies that Mahatma Gandhi ran (Young India and Harijan) 
are examples of journalism at its very best, concerned not with matters of 
the moment but with matters of movement. The Lokamanya once wrote 
that his purpose in publishing Ke sari was to make the rulers know the agonies 
. of the people and tb.e people know their own power. The pain and · the 
. passion of a ria:tion found their. expression through the pen of Tilak and the . 
band . of writers whom he trained, like Kelkar. Kesi:tri strengthened the 
moral and intellectual fortifications of our nation. 

Enough has been. said and written about the thorny relations between 
the Government and the Press. Neither a statesman nor an editor can 
have the last word. What interests me more is the relationship between 
newspapers and the people. 
If editors and correspondents write for the 
people rather than for those in politics, their own effectiveness will increase 
and they will be able to serve the public better. Loka1nanya's message is 
as vaild as ever: to be fearless and frank. 

Only a few days ago, the death occurred of Marshal Mcluhan whose 
aphorism 'The Medium is the Message' became a proverb of our times. 
He himself parodied this statement by saying 'The Medium is the Massage.' 
It was an ironic comment on the ways of our technological age when gadgets 
become ends rather than means. 

We find that 100 per cent literacy does not n1ean more education, and 
total media coverge does not convey more knowledge. From persons 
like Lokamanya Tilak we must rediscover the paran1ountcy of people and of 
ideas. 
Institutions, journals and so on must strive to take ideas to the 
people and people to ideas. 

Intelligentsia in our independence struggle, though most were educated 
in Britain or under British teachers and absorbed British ideas and literature, 
felt passionately Indian. They did mash Indian culture. They did not 
view India with rosy spectacles. Their pride and concern for the country 
gave them more penetrating insight and they clearly saw the weaknesses 
and consciously fought to root them out. They were able to resist the 
tremendous tide of colonial influence. People, however great, come and 

go, but only the growth of the national personality gives a base for personal 
achievement. 

We talk of poor and the rich, the minority and the majority, the rural 
and the urban. But how few people today talk of India! It is a fashion 
today to talk of a 'universal man'. But for this, we have not only to have 
much deeper relationship with the cultures of other countries but roots in 
some particular culture. There are exceptions. But, by and large, only 
those authors from the developing world have won acclaim who are cynical 
about or somewhat ashamed of their background. The growing influence 
of advertisement has resulted in brain-washing, making people believe that 
the world belongs to the rich and industrialized West and that only the 
affluent have the right to dictate fashions and directions. 

Once again I pay tribute to the 'Father of Indian Unrest' on the 100th 
birthday of one of his dear children. Let Kesari continue to serve the people 
of Maharashtra for long years to come and be guided by the light that the 

. Lokamanya gave .. 

Good Film is an Experience 
T ms 1s A very pleasant function. But you may have noticed that the cinema 
industry is an industry which always comes in for criticism. And although 
I have little right to criticise it, because I see so few films, I am going to join 
the· chorus just a little bit. 

The tradition of the Indian cinema is almost as old as that of cinema 
itself. The induction of sound in 1927 gave fresh impetus to the spirit of 
It was interesting to read in a newspaper the 
enterprise and innovation. 
other day that Gandhiji had recorded his voice for the propagation of 
Khadi (handspun and handwoven cloth.) in 1930. 

The transition from movie to talkies naturally changed the language 
of cinema. Sound brought the cinema closer to the literary tradition and 
other established art forms-dance, music and theatre. Today, the number 
of films produced in India; as you all know, is the highest in the world. 
wish I could say that all are equally high in quality. 

Without making any effort, cinema has influenced society deeply in 
a myriad ways. In India; it has also popularised and promoted Hindustani 
in even the non-Hindi speaking States in a manner which other official and 
unofficial efforts have not been able to achieve. 

Speech at the golden jubilee celebrations of the Indian Talkies, Bombay, December 5, 1981 

This is a useful pointer to the importance of visuals in opinion-forntlng 
and for education. Cinema began rightly by keeping close to the life and 
traditions of the people. But as. it expanded, Hindi cinema, perhaps to be 
popular in all regions and to all sections of society; gradually evolved a set 
formula which is not really related to any particular culture. This lack of 
authenticity has brought an element of superficiality and sameness to many 
of our films. The decor, costumes, music, dance and other features give 
little indication of the milieu or region they are supposed to represent. 
This may and indeed does help the film industry to make money. But, 
alas, it also alienates people from their own culture, disturbs family and 
sociai patterns and often introduces false values. 

Cinema is entertainment. 

It is no less important an instrument of 
social change. And I believe that there is no dichotomy between the 

I don't think there is any 
Someone spoke here about the box-office. 
It is for us to see that good 
quarrel between the box-office and good cinema. 
films reach the people, and I can assure you that they will fill the box-office 
also. There are films which do capture tb.e mood of a place, ·a situation 
or a period. . But they are few and far between. Most belabour the obvious, 
ignoring or slurring over the vast range of nuances and hues which are the 
very fabric of our existence. 

\Ve see bravado in place of courage, sentimentality instead of emotion. 
Is it any wonder that films dull the senses and blunt perceptions, and soon 
people don't even know that there is a difference? 

A good film, like any other good art, should be an experience. 

Instead, 
many of our films become time-killers. Those who kill time (it is just another 
way of saying wasting it) are really killing a part of themselves. For, that 
time and that opportunity of making better use of it will neyer come again. 
I cannot understand how such a dramatic medium can miss ~o n1uch of the 
drama all around us, not only amongst human beings but amongst animals 
and all of nature. 

Traditional folk entertainment in our villages, the Yakshagana or the 
Kathakali or the Ramlila, have upheld our artistic tradition and value system 
over the centuries. They retain their purity. But some of our films have 
begun to corrupt this pond. 

Cinema should not hesitate to learn from our experience and apply its 
lessons to the treatment of urban reality so that entertainment can go hand 
in hand with improving the quality of life. 

The printing of books was a giant leap in human history. The published 
words drew not only the thoughts and ideas of our contemporary times but 
even of different periods into the orbit of our acquaintance. 

Cinema and TV have added a spectacular new dimension. We have 
become neighbours and eye witnesses of all people and of every kind of e-yent 
anywhere. 

Good regional cinema has begun to challenge Hindi films and has 
generally given stimulus to the industry, and exhibition of good and artistic 
regional films on an all-India basis is particularly important. Enduring 
national integration can take place only when we are able to create respect 
for and understanding of the cultures of all communities, all sections of 
our society and all regions. 

The dubbing of quality regionalifilms and their exhibition in other 
parts of our country will considerably help in this. This work has been 
neglected. Government and industry should together look into this aspect. 
to 

More theatres are needed; especially small ones, to show films 

appreciative groups as a first step in reaching out to larger audiences. 

I learn that the National Film Development Corporation is dealing 
with this. The spread of good cinema depends on the growth of film 
appreciation. The appreciation of art or indeed of anything of quality is 
not automatic. One is not born with good taste. 

Taste for literature comes with education and familiarity with good 
· books. .The appre9iation of good films will come from continued exposure 
to good cinenia. . 

Film appreciation in schools-~and colleges and among the· general 
public, through regular courses and through film societies, must keep pace 
with the increase in the number of cinema theatres. 

I can tell you of a personal experience. The British have been regarded 
as a singularly unmusical nation. But during the War, as some of you 
here may remember and many may not know, something came up in London 
which was called 'lunch hour concert', where well-known musicians played 
to provide relief from the tension of constant bombing. Either there was 
a very low-priced ticket or no ticket. Workers-office workers and factory 
workers-went to these concerts just as a relief from the tension of their 
work in those very trying conditions. Th1s awakened greater interest and 
after the War they became solid audiences for really good music. And I 
am sure that cinema can certainly do the same. 

Censorship is a negative instrument and cannot help to raise standards. 
The film industry must evolve a code of ethics and try to reach higher levels 
of creativity which will raise the standard of films and inculcate good taste. 
This will surely be more fulfilling for film-makers also. 

We do not want propagandist films. The artist must be free to express 
himself. But am I to believe that our artists are not shocked by the myriad 
questions which every thinking person must pose to himself in this world of 
today? Do all subjects lend themselves to song and dance? Is 
there 
nothing in life but sex and violence? Such superficial treatment of problems 
and human beings is a sad commentary on the levels of creativity in the 
film industry. 

Cinema today, even though it has strong rivals in TV and video, is the 
most important audio-visual manifestation of popular culture. So, the 

standards it sets guide the value systems and quality of life of millions of 
people. 

Great writers and great film-makers have been deeply concerned with 
the problems of their time. We need to discourage superstition, intolerance 
and violence. We need to encourage the dignity of human beings, the status 
of women and the worth of labour and also courage, humour and all the 
qualities which make a society vibrant and meaningful. 

Children deserve special consideration. The President ( of our Republic) 
spoke of this in his speech in Madras. So, I shall not deal with the subject 
except to point out that a film does not become children's film merely 
because there is one or more child actors in it. Special subjects and 
specialized treatment is needed. 

Government is taking increasing interest in the growth of the film 
industry and the promotion of better cinema through the Film and TV 
· Institute, the National Film Archive, the Children's Film Society and the 
It is also operating schemes 

National Film D~velopment Corporation. 
such as the National Film Awards and International Film Festivals . 

Government can · create conditions but obviously canriot assume a 
creative role. The enterprise and impulse of creativity must come from the 
film industry itself and from individuals. 

Like literature, film-making is and should remain an open profession 
so that anyone with something to say should be able to say it in his own 

Having said all this, I might point out that the crisis we see in 
the film world, not only in India but in other parts-and it is even more 
obvious in the TV world-is not merely a film crisis; 
it is a crisis of our 
civilization. It is a crisis in what man is doing to himself. And, obviously, 
cinema cannot be shielded from it. So, if you want to save cinen1a, we have 
to do something much largei than merely cinema. 

We have to look at some of the broader facets of life, see where we are 
leading the world. This is not a task for only government but all people, 
ordinary citizens, every citizen all over the world. It is for them to demand 
It is for them to 
something better. It is for them to fight what is wrong. 
work for peace. And I am convinced that if the voice of the people rises 
for these things, there is no force on earth or anywhere else that can stop it. 

I am glad that you have chosen to honour several distinguished pioneers 
and veterans of the Indian cinema. For me it was a special privilege to 
see many faces which we had loved years ago when I saw many more films 
than I see now. 

I hope that the tradition of dedication and creativity which 

represent will continue to guide the film industry. 

they 

· I thank you for your welcome and I give you and your Academy my 
I hope that this new finstitution will be able to hew a 

very best wishes. 
new path and show a new light to this very persuasive medium. 

Health, Family Planning and Social Welfare 

'~ . . ' r 

Health Care-A Perspective 
THE LADY HARDINGE Medical College is the oldest of Delhi's many major 
It has served the whole of 
centres of medical education and research. 
northern India and has been a pioneer in training women doctors. 
I feel 
it a privilege to participate in its Founder's Day celebrations. 

Doctors have the healing touch but I can say that the attractive young 

doctors before me are a healing sight. 

You have the good fortune to be trained in the latest that medical 
advance can teach out in India. There is hardly an individual who does 
not consider himself cmnpetent to volunteer a cure for one's ailments. 
And this is not as ridiculous as it sounds, for I am told that some doctors 
in the West are now advocating listening to the views of their. patients. 
Dr. Albert Schweitzer, famous for his dedicated medical work in Afrka; 
believed that "each patient carries· his own doctor within hiru •.• We ar~ . 
at our best when we give the doctor who resides within each patient a chance 
to go to work." 

Before I pursue this idea I should like to express some thoughts on the 
state of medical treatment in India. For; it seems to me that we have strayed 
from the main road to health. Our health problems are of gigantic 
. proportions. There is the size of the population. Ignorance, superstition 
and apathy are handmaidens of economic backwardness, and there is 
practicaliy no health consciousness in the average citizen. 

We must constantly re-examine every aspect of our health care-

whether it be medical education or the establishing and running of clinics 
and hospitals, or the proportionate importance given to prevention, cure 
and research. 

Like most branches of higher eaucation, our medical education is 
derived from Britain and now seems influenced by trends in the U.S.A. The 
curricula of our medical colleges give entirely inadequate emphasis on the 
health problems most prevalent in our own country. Although tropical 
diseases constitute 70 per cent of ailments, our colleges and hospitals do not 
have departments in tropical diseases but compete with one another in 
departments that are fashionable in the West, and which serve only a small 
section of our community. 

One of the most serious shortcomings of the Indian pattern of medical 
education is that 50 per cent of medical graduates hanker after post-graduate 
education. There is great and immediate need for good general practitioners 

Address at- the Lady Hardinge Medical College Founder's Day celebrations, New Delhi, 
March 29, 1980 

to look after the most common and recurrent diseases. The M.B.B.S. 
degree should not be regarded as a feeder degree. Those who are prepared 
to render service to the community should be assisted, encouraged and 
rewarded. Most teaching today is -hospital-based rather than cornmunity-
based. Medical colleges attract the best and brightest of our young people. 
I was astonished to hear that after five years of training, many feel diffident 
of their capacity because of lack of awareness of problems in the field and 
the absence of more practical training. Surely, there is something wrong in 
such a system. 

I have deep appreciation for research in unresolved areas of science 
and for the brilliant young people who devote their lives to it. But it is 
also my concern that there should be a correct comprehension of priorities 
and a balance between socially urgent professional skills and basic research. 
We 1nust have centres of excellence. Some doctors must specialize but 
50 per cent is on the high side. This is the mental attitude responsible for 
the enormous migration of our doctors . to. affluent countries. . Doctors 
from poor India go to help rich Britons and Americans not to sneeze: Some 
years ago, a UNESCO study stated that India and Asia were giving techno0 
logical aid to advanced countries in the form of trained manpower. · In 
terms of money, this virtually offsets the economic aid given by developed 
countries to developing ones. 

Leaders of medical education should do some serious thinking on the 
planning of medical studies. The needs of our own people and the aim of 
It is not sufficient for medical graduates 
a healthy India must come first. 
to put in a year or two in the rural areas-although that too is important-
but of giving community-orientation to the entire medical system. 

I am worried that many of the health care programmes undertaken 
largely serve the comparatively better off at the cost of the poor. 
In a 
society marked by scarcity, every new programme or facility tends to be 
monopolised by the stronger. Our public hospitals must cater to the masses 
who are poor; instead, it is the privileged people in important posts who not 
only get preference but the bulk of the facilities, as is true of our Central 
Government Health Service Scheme. 

In 1971-72, Delhi had a hospital system based on the division of the 
city into 15 or 16 segments, with a referral hospital in each area so that 
services in major hospitals were not diluted and overcrowding was avoided. 
But because of the multiplicity of controlling authorities-the Central 
Govenunent, the Municipal Corporation of Delhi, the New Delhi Municipal 
Committee, voluntary organizations, private hospitals-there has been no 
common meeting ground, and hospital services remain unregulated. This 
has resulted in considerable inconvenience to the middle class and the poor, 
who flock to the capital from all parts of the country in the understandable 
- hope of better treatment and care, find that they cannot even get a place to 
stay. Patients wander from hospital to hospital causing duplication of 

work and expenditure. 
It is worth reviving the idea of a Hospital Board 
and a referral hospital for every zone. This approach should also be 
adopted by other big c\ties. 

Then there is the tendency for every hospital to duplicate the specialities 
that exist in another hospital, leading to dispersal of equipment and diffusion 
of specialized manpower. We just do not have the kind of money to afford 
such expenditure. Also, modern medicine depends on tea1n work. 

A country as vast as ours must provide facilities for transplantation 
of heart and kidney and other such miracles of surgery and medicine. Yet, 
at any given time, the number of people with a hole in the heart would be 
s1nall as against the hundreds of thousands who suffer from less complex 
diseases. All the world over the question is being asked whether the main 
purpose of medicine is to keep a few terminal cases alive or to enable the 
many to live healthy and well-adjusted lives. Medicine must have its 
. triu111phs. Tough challenges enable medical science to grow, just as the bad 
case is said to make the law ... However, the needs of the many must prevail · 
over those of the few: The time has con1e when disproportiCJnate expenditure 
towards serving ever smaller sections of· society milst give way to policies 
which benefit the c01nmunity at large. The health strategy of India must 
be hnbued with the democratic spirit and concentrate on preventing diseases 
that afflict the large numbers. 

There has been some debate on 'modern' versus 'indigenous' medicine. 
Today's new is tomorrow's old. Medical knowledge is full of skeletons 
of theories once believed to be infallible. Science is basically the search 
for the cause-and-effect relationships in the universe. Old distinctions 
between matter and energy or mind and matter have long ago ceased·to 
be operative. 
I am not a specialist but I am deeply interested in finding 
out what is being attempted in the various fields of specialization. The 
discoveries of the last 50 or 60 years are nothing as compared to 
the 
discoveries that ·await us in the next 50 years. Yet many new discoveries 
are but reiteration of ancient knowledge which until a few years ago was 
despised as quackery. And there is new respect and search for the wisdom 
of the ancients. 

Indian medicine, indeed Indian philosophy as a whole, has always 
recognized the vital and inalienable connection between the mind and the 
body, and, hence the importance of n1ental attitude on physical well-being 
and that of the body sickness on the mind. The concept of Maya or illusion 
is the same on a vaster scale, embracing all experience. An old English 
film song said it in more simple terms-"Happiness is just a point of 
view." 

Our medical scientists should investigate the penumbra region of the 
relationship between mind and body. Yoga as evolved in our col!ntry bad 
acquired many insights into the impact of the will and the mind on bodily 
I find that Western universities have ta.ken to research 
chemical functions. 

in this field in a big way, We, the home of Yoga, cannot afford to neglect 
this work. 

Modern research confinns that pain can be affected by attitudes and 
that' the human mind can control pain and fight illness. Norman Cousins, 
an American editor and author, has been a good friend of India, viewing 
our problems with more sy1npathy than most foreigners. 
In a study of 
his own severe illness, he claims that laughter reduced. the inflammation of 
his joints, confirmed by a reduction in the sedimentation rate both sustained 
and cumulative. He wonders if laughter stimulated 
the endorphins. 
Mr Cousins quotes Dr Albert Schweitzer as believing that the "best 
medicine for any illness was the knowledge that he had a job to do, plus a 
good sense of humour". Similarly, that "disease tended to leave him 
rather rapidly because 
it found so little hospitality inside his body.'' 
Cousins also tells of an experiment undertaken by a Japanese doctor in 
Tokyo, which satisfied him that laughter played a definite part in tile 
improvement of his TB patients. -· . 
I have given these examples only fo · stress the importance · of having 
an open mind, not to reject any idea, any system 111.erely becauseit does riot 
:find place in your textbooks. Success and satisfaction in life comes from 
being vibrantly alive and active, observant,. interested and understanding, 
always willing to learn and to share your knowledge. And that is also what 
makes for a good doctor. 

May you :find fulfilment in your work and may it bring you the gratitude 

and blessings of your patients and better health to India! 

Role of Nurses 
I HAVE ALWAYS had the greatest admiration for what I think is perhaps the 
noblest and most essential calling and I have done my best to support it 
in every way. Some of us have had occasion to see the invaluable help 
which nurses give to doctors. From doctors and nurses we expect confidence 
and skill, but from nurses something more is asked for-personalised concern, 
cheerfulness and care. The nursing profession is one of service and of 
giving. 
It is significant that, like most of the worthwhile things of life. 
nursing was born with great difficulty and struggle, 

With each such ceremony you recall the name of Florence Nightingale. 
All of you must have known how very difficult her task was, what tremendous 

Speech at the lamp lighting ceremony for nursing students of the All-India Institute of 
Medical Sciences, New Delhi, September 11, 1980 

• 1···,c· ,·eco·; ·, 

HEALTH, FAMILY PLANl'flNG AND SOCIAL WELFARE 

resistance there was, not only from the government of the day but even 
from the medical profession, to the very idea that there should be this kind 
of nursing. But she was a woman of courage and conviction. And when 
you have these two qualities; there are very few obstacles which can obstruct 
your going forward and achieving what you want to do. 

i t ,; ! 

The lamp she lit has illumined many lives. The pioneers of the nursing 
profession have not had an easy time anywhere in the world. In our country, 
there was the added difficulty of social prejudice and superstition. Yet, 
through the dedication and perseverance of nurses, the profession has come 
to be accepted even in our villages. We may not yet be able to give our 
nurses what they deserve, but we can say that the old prejudices against 
them are gradually on the way out. 

Talking on this subject, one cannot help thinking of another person, 
Mother Teresa who, in the true tradition of ancient India, has become a 
symbol of service and love in our country and almost all the countries and 
continents of the globe .. 

· Our major probleni is uneven development of health.services and nursing · · 

in different regions.· Up to ten years ago, the majority of the nurses in 
this country came from a single State, Kerala. And before that, most 
nurses were Anglo-Indians. We never came across any other in 
this 
profession. To the nurses of Kerala goes the credit for· keeping up the 
tradition of the profession in India and even abroad. The Kerala system 
of rural medical aid is a good one, largely owing to the dedication of 
Malayalee nurses. Kerala has a low rate of infant mortality and also leads 
in family planning. This is the result of the growth of education, particuiarly 
among the under-privileged and minority. communities. 

Women doctors and nurses are crucial for the transmission of ideas 
of health, hygiene and family welfare. In the wards; nurses should educate 
patients in the elementary principles of health, hygiene and nutrition, like 
care of the teeth, clipping of the nails and dietetics without which health 
care cannot be had. 
I wonder if wards could be decorated with charts, 
pictures, posters, etc., giving infor111ation about nutrition, physical exercises 
and simple dos and don'ts. We must have far more community health 
and public health nurses so that medical care does not remain hospital-
centred or institution-based. Science should reach out to the people and 
these two categories of nurses can provide preventive, promotive, curative 
and rehabilitative care within the family environment. 

A nurse is not merely an aide and assistant to a doctor. She has an 
independent part to play in many areas where doctors need not necessarily 
be present. 
In the Western world, nurse anaesthetists, properly trained, 
take on important duties in minor surgical procedures, as also in care of the 
new-born. The nurse is in her own right a key member of the medical team. 
Many intensive care-units, dialysis units and blood banks today fall 
within the realm of nursing specialities. Auxiliary nurse midwives, who do 

such valuable field work along with women health visitors, should be given 
due recognition on a basis of equality and not be regarded as lesser members 
of the profession. 

We also need nurses who could undertake the responsibility of looking 

after the old, infirm and the chronically ill patients at their residences 
the paralysed or patients of chronic heart trouble. 

Voluntary social workers should be organized to relieve the nurses of 
the many non-clinical tasks which the latter are saddled with in our hospitals, 
e.g., filling of forms, store-keeping, and so on. Besides the approximate 
200,000 registered medical practitioners of the modern system of medicine, 
we have a large number of practitioners of traditional systems. But the 
degree of care available in the remote corners of the country is still negligible. 
\Ve have to depend upon an iutern1ediate level of health personnel to provide 
this basic service. 

I do not advocate a lowering of standards. Even the countries suppos~d 
to be advanced and affluent have a category called the medical assistant. In 
. our country, with the requirement that all doctors should. have degrees, .. 
the profession has gravitated towards big towns and cities. Rural areas 
have few medical facilities either in personnel" or equipment. · 

It is important to develop an intermediate-level health person who could 
extend health care to the remotest areas. This programme could be 
integrated with the training of community-health nurses and public-health 
nurses. 

The earliest social work which I did was in my early teens during the 
1931 movement. Near the town where I lived, Allahabad, there was firing 
in which a number of young people were very seriously wounded. But 
an order went round that no doctor in government service-and in those 
days all the hospitals were government hospitals-was allowed to treat the 
patients. My mother decided to turn one big room in our house into an 
emergency ward. The doctors very kindly agreed to come, after dark, 
as it should not be known that they had come, but the nursing was left to 
us, to all the girls whom we could collect who were willing to work; and 
I remember sitting day and night. 

One young person had a major operation and I remember that the doctor 
had said: "You may do what you can and I have done everything what I 
could, but he has no chance of survival." I put my trust in God and said, 
"Whatever may be the case, this person has to survive, otherwise I am not 
It may not have been our nursing, it may 
going to believe in anything". 
have been my prayer, but he did survive. And long afterwards, when I 
was touring the constituency during my father's election, a much older person 
came to me and showed a few scars over his abdomen and said that he had 
survived. 

I have- a special: feeling and respect for the nursing profession. For 
anybody, it is bad luck to be in hospital, but it is good luck to have good 

HEALTH, FAMILY PLANNING AND SOCIAL WELFARE 

nurses there. Someone has said: "There is not enough darkness in the whole 
world to put out the light of one small candle". And here we have not 
one but very many, a growing number of charming young women to take 
up this work with dedication and sincerity. 

These young people, who have lit their candles and received their caps 
today, have my congratulations and sincere good wishes for their future 
career. They have passed some examination, but life itself is an examination 
and I have no doubt that just as they have been siiccessful on the threshold 
of their career, this success will follow them throughout their lives. 

May you bring light to the hospitals and homes you visit, and may 

the light in you glow with happiness and satisfaction in your work! 

Family Planning-A Voluntary Programme 
A NATION'S \VEALTH are its people. As we launch the Sixth Five Year-Plan, 
we are more than ever before keenly aware of the iinportance of harnessing 
human talents in the service of the nation. 
If each man, each woman and 
each child is to become a better citizen, a better worker and a better contri-
butor as well as beneficiary in the process of development, our emphasis must 
be on two programmes: education in its widest sense and family planning. 
Smaller families ensure more efficient management of income for the 
maximum weifare of every men1ber of the family. Family planning is 
essentially a means of improving the health of women and children, and to 
make the nation as a whole to become stronger and more dynamic. 

It has always been our view, and I reiterate it1 that this programme will 
be wholly voluntary. People should be persuaded to have smaller families. 
If properly approached, it is not difficult to convince them. 

MESSAGE-1 

With all the wonders of science and technology, the greatest 1niracle 

is still that of life. The very word birth awakens new hopes. 

For many many cent:uries mortality was high, survival depended on 
the numbeFs in a tribe. Vast open spaces and forest areas were uninhabited 

Message sent on September, 13, 1980 for the National Family Welfare Fortnight 
Message_t.o the Third International Seminar on Maternal and Perinatal Mortality 
Pregnancy Termination and Sterilization, New Delhi, October 3, 1980 

or called out to be tilled. 
but birth was a matter of chance. 

It was natural for large families to be honoured, 

What a different world we live in! Burgeoning populations exert 
tremendous pressure on land, on resources and on employment, even on 
what was taken to be the most free of all-the water we drink and the air 
we breathe. Population control has become a problem of global dimension. 
We can now curb the size of our families and many do so. 

In the West, this is a major programme for the women's liberation 
movement. Our own attitude may be different, but all over the world, 
societies are dominated by men and although the burden of child-bearing 
and rearing falls entirely 011 the woman, her opinions and welfare are largely 
ignored. 

The personal rights of women as well as national and. global necessity 
are at the core of the current worldwide movement for limited families. Th) 
aspect of human rights is as important as the medical and psychological 
. problems of pregnancy or its termination.·· 

· My good wishes for the Third International Seminar on Maternal and 
f>ermatal Mortality, Pregnancy Termination and Sterilization. 

FAMILY PLANNING AND THE GOVERNMENT 

QUESTION: Madam Prime Ivlinister, what priorities does your Government 
accord to the Family Planning Programme? 

PRIME MINISTER : Our Government was the very first in the whole world 
which took.it up as an official programme, and that itself shows how important 
it is to us. As you know, our population has grown enormously; we add 
an Australia every year. 

QUESTION : Mrs Gandhi, do you see any alternative for economic viability 
for the nation in the face of failure to curb population growth rate to a 
manageable proportion? 

PRIME MINISTER : The real answer, of course, is develop1nent from both 
angles; first, the development to provide what the people need, to open up 
areas; and, secondly, because development itself curbs families, I mean 
people who reach a particular standard are more conscious of their duty 
to the child, i.e., they want something U1ore for their children than they 

Interview with Smt. Rami Chhabra for Doordarshan, New Delhi, September 24. 1980 

i~f : .... "· 

HEALTH, FAMILY PLANNING AND SOCI.AL WELFARE 

had; and, therefore, they themselves think about smaller families. But 
ultimately, of course, size of the population has to be tackled at various 
levels not just through development, but through persuasion of the people . 

QUEST~ON : Because development itself would be denied if we cannot control 
the situation to the manageable proportions. 

PRIME M~NISTER : Well, it is a bit of circle. For instance, take places like 
Punjab where there has been agricultural progress or industrial areas or 
even a place like Kerala which has educational progress, there the birth rate 
has gone down. 

QUESTION : Would you say that even n1ore important in its place, within 
the economic perspective, is the question of family planning being the primary 
concern of the fundamental right of the woman-not to be denied options 
in her life-and of the child not to be born into a situation where it is just 
in a position of.neglect? .· 

. PmME MINISTER : Why leave Ollt the father? I agree with the view that 
human rights' aspect of it is very important, specially for the woman, because 
she has the entire burden of child-bearing and child-rearing, and yet her 
opinion is hardly ever asked for; nor is there much consideration for her 
welfare. And, unfortunately, the child is one who suffers from this. Today, 
birth should be a matter of choice of both parents so that they feel responsible 

· for the child and give it its due rights. 

QUESTION : But, given the importance of family planning, would you say, 
like national security, it should be part of the minimum national consensus, 
i.e., above party politics, and we should be willing to promote this national 
consensus for the country? 

PR~ME MINISTER : 'Well, obviously a subject like family planning should 
be above any controversy. But,_as you have noticed in the past years, there 
have been certain parties and groups which have done tremendous propaganda 
against this, telling people of one religion that they will be exterminated and 
the others that their numbers were going down and they will be in difficulty; 
besides, of course, all the propaganda that was done about sterilization. 
Because we do not believe in coercion, we think that there should be 
persuasion. But this must be done on a massive educational scale and unless 
everybody is in favour, it will take a very long time and may defeat the whole 
purpose of it. 

QUESTION : But knowing the very low, totally ineffective performance that 
has been there in the Family Planning Programme in the last fe_w years, what 

steps is your Government now proposing to take to revitalize the 
programme? , 

PRIME MINISTER : I think we have to involve not just the departinent that 
. is in charge of this, but the whole population, especially, schools, the whole 
youth movement, women's organisations and other institutions which are 
I mean everybody gets into it 
concerned with any type of social welfare. 
to create the right atmosphere; and you find that village women are ready 
or any woman for that matter, not just one. One part which is very important 
is that we must ensure better health, because, if there is any chance of children 
dying more, then people will not be willing to risk that. So, they must be 
ensured better health, education and, of course, even employnient later on. 
It is part of national planning as a whole. 

QUESTION : Madam Prime Minister, would you be in favour of systematically 
· linking family planning with.incentives? I mean the tax structure on 
the 
one hand and .. all the collective inputs on the other so that a system of 
reciprocal responsibility can be established between the State. and the . 
people? · 

. PRIME MINISTER : Well, it is a very complicated matter and has been discussed 
many times. Previously, we did give some incentives and some disincentives. 
I do not know how well it worked. 

It has to be gone into. 

QUESTION : Are you willing to examine the issue? 

PRIME MINISTER : I am willing to examine it. 

QUESTION : And also, would you feel there 1s a need for review of the law 
in order to see how it can be made more supporting to the family planning 
effort? You know a moral framework can be created within which 
incentives for family planning are decided upon and not struck down as 
discriminatory. 

PRIME MINISTER : I do not know whether you can create a moral climate 
legally. That is a question of changing attitudes to life. 

QUESTION : And, finally, Mrs Gandhi, may I ask you, since a great deal of 
research has pointed out that women's education, women's employment, 
raising of women's status is important for fertility decline to take place, 
quite apart from the fact that this is badly needed in the country itself, 
is your Government contemplating any particular steps for bringing up the 
status of women? 

'..Ve have to start at the bottom, 
PRIME MINISTER : We are doing a great deal. 
i.e., the girls; and I think a great deal is being done now to help girls to 
continue with their education and not drop out as they have been doing. 

U.N. Water Decade 

Gracious be diVine waters for 
ow· protectio11, be they for our drink, 
And stream on us bliss and happiness. 
Sol'ereigns over precious things 
and rulers over men. vVaters l 
We . seek healing balm of you. 

-The Rigpeda 

w~TER IS issENTIAL to life; and civilization is something of a dialogue 
between man and water. The earliest humans settled on river banks, 
besides lakes and on the sea coast, and there too flourished agricultural 
and niuch of industrial activity. The proper management of water for 
domestic and econo1nic purposes is a basic aspect of social 1nanagement and 
government. 

A distinguishing characteristic of an advanced country is the provision 
of clean drinking water to its people in urban and rural areas. Economically 
backward societies, 1nost of which are in tropical or desert zones, have a 
high incidence of water-borne diseases. But they do not have the large 
financial, technological and managerial outlays which modem sanitation 
demands. Their people also lack the education and the 1neans to change 
their personal habits. 

Historians remind us that in the middle of the nineteenth century, when 
Britain was the world's dominant industrial and Inilitary power, its rivers 
were open sewers and cholera, dysentery and typhoid were widely prevalent. 
Sanitation follows scientific progress. This fact has to be remembered 
when the poor sanitation in developing countries is commented upon 
caustically. I am told that as late as 1960 there were areas in Scotland 
which had neither drinking water nor electricity. 

Today, mankind as a whole has the knowledge and the means to 
. ensure basic sanitation all over the world. 
International co-operation 
can and must supplement the inadequate resources of poor countries to 

Message sent on October 8, 1980 to the World Health, official organ of the World Health 
Organization, on the United Nations Water Decade, 1981-1990 

. ··r· 

. f'• ~. 

ensure the supply of clean drinking water and improve their arrangement 
for sewage disposal. I welcome the plans of the World Health Organization 
to observe the "International Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation Decade." 
Every nation should offer its fullest co-operation to the Organization so that 
the World Health Assembly's resolve to provide clean water for all the people 
of the world by 1990 can be a reality. 

Science can be a tremendous help to mankind but its wrong or short-

sighted short-term uses can cause incalculable harm. Modern technology 
may have cleared the dust of poverty but it has spread its own pollution 
which is destroying our enviromnent. The vast arsenals of arman1ents 
are a hideous hoard of death and devastation. New cheinical poisons are 
affecting even the unborn; crippling and deforming children. The ozone 
layer is already being recklessly endangered. Man is sullying the oceans 
and scattering garbage in outer space! 

In many countries, unregulated development has meant private affluence 
and. public squalor. The developing countries have rightly adopted the 
planned approach which combines public and private good. . Technology 
as developed ih the Westlias involved the mechanization of many functions · 
and also the input of vast quantities· of energy, both calling for large . 
investments. Developing countries need employment-creating and energy-
conserving technologies, also the more natural ones which have not yet 
been fully developed. Fortunately, waste-disposal can itself be a major 
generator of energy, supporting numerous small crafts and industries .. 

In a world where fossil fuels are being fast depleted, organic human 
and cattle residues can produce biogas which can be utilized as fuel. We, 
in India, have undertaken indigenous research in this field. Vie should 
encourage programmes to promote cleanliness along with prosperity. One 
of our major objectives is to provide safe drinking water to all of our 560,000 
villages. 

May the United Nations Water Decade prove to be an example of 
international co-operation in helping people everY1Yhere to realize one of 
their basic needs-a clean living environment! 

Health Care and India 
I AM DELIGHTED to have the opportunity of coming, after many years, to 
It is a 
a well-loved city which has played an important part in history. 
pleasure to address this august gathering, the World Health Assembly. 

Address to the thirty-fourth World Health Assembly, Geneva, May 6, 1981 

Life is not mere living but living in health. The health of the individual 
as of nations is of primary concern to us all. Health is not the absence of 
illness but a glowing vitality, a feeling of wholeness with a capacity for 
continuous· intellectual and spiritual growth. What is our ultimate goal? 
Is it the mere accretion of medical and other knowledge, the building of 
better machines and even hospitals, or are all these meant for a higher purpose 
to 1nake 1nan better and more capable of handling the emotional and other 
stresses posed by material progress, increasing pace, and the lack of privacy 
in contemporary living? 
In India, even in very ancient times it was believed 
that physical, mental and spiritual health are intrinsically interwoven. 
This is the basis of the science of yoga. The medical system perfected 
in India, Ayurveda, or the Knowledge of the Span of Life, in 1nany ways 
foreshadowed WHO's own definition of health as "a state of complete 
physical, mental and social well-being". 

Dr: Mahler and his colleagues deserve congratulations and encourage-

ment on their vision of 'Health for All by the Year 2000'. This envisages 
strengthening of public health programmes of developing countries where 
most diseases are concomitants of econ01nic backwardness. 

Yet, it should not be imagined that affluent countries .have no health 
problems. They already experience the tensions, mental and physical, 
to which the dwellers of densely populated cities succumb. So, while 
the old diseases are being wiped out; new ailments are making themselves 
felt. New industrial processes must share the blame for this. Also, men 
and women seem willing to risk illness by over-indulgence in eating, smoking 
or drinking rather than practising the self-restraint so essential to health. 
In affluent countries, 111edical treatment has become so exceedingly costly 
that they too need health insurance and assistance. Psychiatric treatment 
is prohibitive. 

It is pertinent to recall that until a century and a half ago, the death 
rates and the general prevalence of diseases were roughly the same in all 
countries. The scientific discoveries of the nineteenth century enabled 
Europe to cut down the death rate. This period also coincided with rapid 
economic growth in those lands. 
In Africa and Asia, however, the death 
rate is declining because of new miracle drugs and campaigns against 
epidemics. Once it is recognized that better health is not a mere offshoot 
of overall economic development, and that major improvements in health 
are possible in the absence of industrialization, it follows that the patterns 
of public health and health administration of advanced countries are not 
necessarily appropriate for developing ones. The vast increases in population 
in developing countries are the outcome of successful public health 
programmes, but they constitute a further challenge to science, to governments 
· and to mankind. 

Long before 111odern communications and economic forces proclaimed 
the-interdependence of the world, epidemics had demonstrated that humanity 

is one in its vulnerability. Smallpox has been the latest of the epidemics 
to be eradicated, and an estimated billion dollars have been saved by giving 
up compulsory vaccination. But is it being used to assist other developmental 
work on health? In fact, the. story of international assistance 
tells that 
development does not command the enthusiasm that defence does. 
In 
India, 94 per cent of resources for development are mobilised domestically. 
Only six per cent comes as aid, but it is much needed as a catalyst of change. 
We are told that we are on the threshold of a new age of biology. Major 
discoveries are pron1ised in cell biology, genetics and 
immunology. 
Developing countries hope that these will enable them to overcome many 
of the old tropical diseases-particularly those connected with malnutrition, 
diarrhoeal disorders and communicable diseases. WHO has a commendable 
programme of tropical medicine. Leaders of medicine all over the world 
should evolve a special project in this field as part of the 'Health For All' 
schemes. 

May I say a few words about the priorities of medical research? Affluent 

societies are spending vast sums of money understariclably on the search · · · · 
for new products aiid processes to alleviate suffering and to p:r0Io11g life: · · 
In the process, drug manufacture has become a powerful industry, subject 
to the sa1ne driving considerations of other big industries, that is, concentra-
tion on profit, fierce competition and recourse to hard-sell advertising. 
Medicines, which may be of the utmost value to poorer countries, can be 
bought by us only at exorbitant prices since we are unable to have adequate 
independent bases of research and production. This apart, sometimes 
dangerous new drugs are tried out on populations of weaker countries, 
although their use is prohibited within the countries of 1nanufacture. It 
also happens that publicity makes us victims of habits and practices which 
are economically wasteful or wholly contrary to good health. You are 
all familiar with the controversy over the export of baby foods to developing 
countries. 

We do need excell61:it modern hospitals. But the desire for ever larger 

hospitals, 1nore often than not oriented towards high cost n1odern technolo-
gical medicine, has to be resisted. Primary health care must be within reach, 
in tenns,of distance as well as money, of all people. The world has found 
to its dismay that resources are not unlimited.· Hence, waste of any kind 
and in any form, particularly in health and hospital care, should be strongly 
discouraged; and the countries' resources must be more equitably distributed. 
If this is true of the national scene, it is even more so internationally. 

In India, we should like health to go to homes instead of larger numbers 
gravitating towards centralised hospitals. Services must begin where people 
are and where problems arise. We have acquired the capability of placing 
satellites in orbit which give useful informa:tion, but we have not yet been 
able to reach out to all our rural people. However, we are engaged in 
reorganizing our medical administration. Our outlook has be.en admirao!y 

expressed in one of the documents prepared by our doctors, which says, 
"Health is neither a commodity to be purchased nor a service to be given; 
it is a process of knowing, living, participating and being." 

The disparities in levels of medical research and administration also 
affect us in another way. At great expense and effort we give our brightest 
young men and women medical education. But a large proportion of them 
are lured by the high salaries and tempting opportunities for further work 
which affluent countries offer. Thus, we lose the skilled manpower 
so desperately needed to save our own people. Brain-drain has been called 
the technical aid that developing countries give to the rich. 

My idea of a better-ordered world is one in which medical discoveries 
would be free of patents and there would be no profiteering from life or death. 
The world community should also work out some forn1 of recompense for 
the loss suffered by developing countries because of this migration of trained 
doctors and nurses. 

A country's progress is generally judged in tenns of its GNP. But · 
surely the health of the people is also a significant yardstick. That is why · 
we 1nust stress the need for a health revolution in developing countries, 
not only to wipe out diseases and to make available specialised treatn1ent, 
but, what is equally essential, to provide basic health care and to take 
preventive measures. Education from the earliest stages must include 
certain elementary information about health, sanitation, cleanliness, the 
avoidance of contagious diseases and the preservation of the environment 
which is closely linked to these. 

The world, and we in the developing countries, are beset with 1nany 
health problems. But at this point I should like to take up t:hree specific 
ite1ns. My country has participated successfully in the malaria and 
smallpox eradication programmes. But the cunning and urge for survival 
of the ubiquitous mosquito has outwitted us, and has proved stronger than 
we ha.d realised, and he or rather she; for I am told that the female is far 
111ore deadly; has returned to disturb our sleep. Such focussing on special 
diseases and making all-out efforts to end them is a rewarding exercise. 

I wish we could do the same for leprosy which is such a dread disease 
but now well within the powers of contemporary medicine to control. I 
pay tribute to the dedicated persons who, in my country and elsewhere, 
have devoted their entire lives to this demanding work. Obviously, such 
voluntary work can have only limited reach. Leprosy is prevalent in some 
53 countries. If this problem is not scientifically and vigorously attacked 
right now, it will spread and be with us for long. The time has come to 
utilise better health education, better health technology and inlmunological 
advances to launch a global campaign to eradicate leprosy from the Earth 
within the next twenty years. A major obstacle is the general public's 
leprosy. Peopte tend to evade 
ignorance and superstition regarding 
investigation and hesitate to admit to the disease at the early stages when 

a cure could be complete and easier. This sense of shame is outdated and 
dangerous. 

· . The second is blindness. 

It is said that at least 15 per cent is 
preventable by the addition of grenes in early childhood diet and by simple 
treatment. The WHO could devise a special international programme with 
en1phasis on safeguarding children from blindness, just as this year it has 
drawn attention to the problems of the disabled. 

The third, though by no n1eans less important, 

is the question of 
population control. India is among the very few developing countries, 
if not the only one, in which the increase in the production of grain is larger 
than the increase in people. But the hard, cold fact remains that today 
men and wo1nen need a more varied diet and want much more besides food. 
At the rate at which we are growing, it will be increasingly difficult to match 
the demand for consumer and other goods and even for living space. 

The Government of India was one of the first to take up family planning 
as a part of its official policy. · Our aim is not merely to curb ti,ie growth· 
of population but to have hippier a11d . healthier families which, in our · 
circumstances, means smaller families, We are disturbed that our recent 
census shows an alarming increase. It is small satisfaction to know ·that 
son1e of this is due to people living longer, and not to a higher birth rate. 
In fact, our family planning programmes are estimated to have prevented 
29 million births in the last decade. 

Because there has been such wrong reporting and an entirely erroneous 
picture given of our policy, I should like to clarify that we neither believe 
in nor have we practised forcible sterilization as a matter of policy. We 
did emphasize what was called 'motivation', that is, persuading people to 
participate in this programme; operations were conducted by con1petent 
and authorized 1uedical personnel. 
In this, due to mistaken over-zealousness 
or other mischief, there were some cases, but the margin was no larger than 
in other cases of medical or other error. What did incalculable t.arm was 
the baseless propaganda which some interested parties and individuals 
unleashed about our family planning schemes, and the political use that was 
made of it by gross exaggeration and even falsehood. 

I shall give two instances to illustrate my point. At that time, some 
groups started an insidious and mischievous whispering campaign that 
we planned to sterilize the entire population. 
In the wake of a flash flood 
in Patna where the drinking water bad becon1e contaminated, people resisted 
the team of doctors who had gone to inoculate them against cholera. Some 
months later, our desire to give protection against diphtheria, tetanus and 
whooping cough to children, who went to municipal schools, was thwarted 
because the parents were misled into thinking that the children were being 
sterilized! 

By and large, women even in rural areas do want family planning. 
Our people are beginning to understand that children have certain needs 

and are not merely hands to help the family. However, controlled families 
are possible only if parents are reasonably assured of good health facilities 
for the survival of their children. As yet no inexpensive and effective remedy 
is available. Our scientists are working on this and claim that they are on 
the brink of major discoveries. 

I should like to take advantage of my presence at WHO to stress the 
need for a new dynamic and better co-ordinated programme of research 
in contraception. Family planning programmes are awaiting a big break-
through. Without a safe, preferably oral, drug which women and men 
can take, no amount of government commitment and political determination 
will avail. 

Life is and perhaps always will be a struggle, although the nature of 
it keeps changing. To meet it we need vision, faith, courage and dogged 
perseverance. These are the qualities I admire in individuals and 
in 
organizations. These are the characteristics of the role of the WHO .. 
That is why l have come all tliis way to express our appreciation of its. work 
and to assure it of my Government's support . I give it my good \Vishes .. 

National Consensus on Family Planning 

FAMILY PLANNING rs a comparativ.ely modern problem. In the early decades 
of this century, Gokhale, Visvesvarayya and Karve stressed the importance 
of population control. The National Planning Committee of the Indian 
National Congress underlined the importance· of planned parenthood. 
Family planning has been a basic postulate of free India's national policy. 
This country was the first . .t-9 have a governmental family planning 
programme. Over the years, this has helped to generate an awareness, 
at least among the educated, of the need to restrict our rate of population 
growth. An extensive rural family planning infrastructure has been created 
and a large number of paramedical and extension workers have been trained. 
We have focussed on maternal and child care and have been able to bring 
down maternal and infant 1nortality rates. However, we have to admit 
that the programme has been only marginally 
successful. Kerala, 
Maharashtra, Orissa; Punjab and Tamil Nadu have done well. but not, I 
am sorry to state, the other States. And I hope the Members of Parliament, 

Inaugural speech at the first National Conference of Parliamentarians on Problems of 
Population and Development, organized by the Indian Association of Parliamentarians, 
New Delhi, May 25, 1981 

who are present from the other States, will make a special note. Mention 
has also been made of the recent census which has shocked us all. We 
are now 683.8 million. But I am told that our family planning programme 
is estimated to have prevented 29 million births in the past decade. But, 
again, our death-curbing strategy had been far more successful than our 
birth control strategy. 

At the present rate, our population will double in about 31 years. 
I have often heard people saying that we add an Australia every year to our 
population, but what we don't ren1ember is that the 13 1nillion people of 
Australia have as much income as the 684 millions of India. So far, 
fortunately, the increase in our grain output is ahead of that of our population . 
. Our health and educational opportunities are also expanding. But no matter 
how large the resources and opportunities of a society in the aggregate, it 
is the fair distribution which distinguishes a good society from an unjust 
one. 
In terms of overall production we are among the first ten or ·twelve 
nations of the whole world. But in per capita terms, the World Bank places 
us 106th. Like all other burdens, that of increasing population falls on the 
poor, narrowing their range of choices. · 

The ti111e has come for us, while in a state of shock, to revamp and 
revitalize our family planning programn1e, to re-examine existing schemes 
for information, communication and motivation. Studies show that a 
large number of our people, even in remote villages, do want family planning. 
Then why don't they practise family plalllling? That is the question. Has 
bureaucratization of the progran1me blunted enthusiasm and stunted efforts 
at the grassroots level? Or, are there any other problems which have 
arisen? Let us learn from the States where the progran1n1e has made a 
visible impact. 

New conununication strategies n1ust combine individual case work 
and the 1nass approach. Simultaneously, clinical and other facilities should 
be rapidly improved, made more accessible and developed as an integral 
part of a comprehensive health care system. Family planning should be 
made consistent with the needs of the people and be related especially to 
the health and care of women and children, and the economic well-being 
of the family as a whole. We must also be careful that any programme 
should relate to the local culture and tradition of people. A programme 
that may work in J & K or in Kerala may not work in Nagaland. Or, a 
theme that will make a definite impression in one State may not appeal at 
all in another. So, we must have a certain amount of flexibility in our 
programmes. 

Population trends and development policies are interlinked in numerous 
ways: Many- demographers believe that high fertility 
is an inevitable 
response to the social uncertainties and economic shortcomings of developing 
countries. We realize that family planning cannot succeed without parallel 

HEALTH, F~LY PLANNING AND SOCIAL WELFARE 

changes . in the social situation -
their educational status and facilities for health care. 

in the living conditions of the masses, 

It has been said that prosperity is the best contraceptive. Yet, in 
order to achieve prosperity and to have enough for all, we cannot afford 
the risk of increasing numbers overtaking the availability of necessities and 
even of living space. We cannot afford to wait for social and economic 
changes to bring about an appropriate motivational environment in which 
a small family becomes the rule. 

Human will must intervene and change the circumstances. Education 

in the wider sense of the word, formal and informal-through all organiza-
tions, institutions and services and, of course, committed individuals-is 
the most effective instrument to bring about changes of attitudes and 
behaviour and make men and woinen more enthusiastic participants in a 
mass movement for smaller families. 

is particularly 

Women's education 

important. Married women, 
properly appro~ched, could be the best evangelists. ··Children _are not hands 
· for work but mouths to feed, bodies to clothe and shelter, and have a hqst 
of other iieeds. · People b.ave to be convinced that population is determinant 
of development. 

India has been known for its realistic acceptance of all facets of life. 
How unfortunate then that the question of contraception is still clothed in 
veils of embarrassment and bashfulness! Ne one is ashamed of other 
operations or of swallowing all kinds of pills. Why should they be so with 
regard to vasectomy or tubectomy or of taking the pill? 

I reiterate my Government's total com1nitment to voluntary family 
planning. We have been and are firmly against compulsion. There was 
a hue·and cry about individual cases where something had gone wrong. 
Later, it was found that these were but an insignificant fraction of the total 

After false propaganda to denigrate family planning, it is good that 
there has been some perceptible improvement in performance during 1980-81. 
The number of sterilizations and of conventional contraceptive users has 
increased, although the use of the IUD and oral pills has remained more 
or less static. These non-terminal methods should be popularized, especially 
among newly married couples, as they are better suited to rural areas where 
facilities for sterilization or the IUD have not been developed on an adequate 
scale. 

Obviously, family planning should be the centre of planned development. 
The Sixth Plan has earmarked over Rs. 10,000 million for family planning, 
which is funded entirely by the Central Government. Lack of resources 
is not a restraint. 

Govermnent is interested in research efforts to discover new devices 
__ which are effective, inexpensive, reversible and safe. Recently, addressing 
I appealed to the international medical 

the World Health Assembly, 

community to take up the challenge of finding a safe, preferably oral drug 
which women and men could take. The burden of family planning should 
be a shared one and .not fall on women alone. 

Family planning must become a movement of the people, by the people, 
for the people. Only then can our hopes be realized. While provision of 
the infrastructure and services must be the responsibility of government, 
the work of motivation and spreading of the message cannot be confined to 
officials. The responsibility must be borne by community organizations, 
local institutions, trade unions, mahila mandals and political parties. 
In 
activating these organizations, Members of Parliament and State Assemblies 
can contribute greatly. 

There is talk of the desirability of a national consensus on basic problems. 
If there is any one issue on which a national consensus is most urgent, surely 
In recent years, family planning was dragged into 
it is family planning. 
political and partisan controversy. · But let us now leave that phase-and move 
forward. 

· · I am glad that some leaders of political parties as well as major figures 
. in this field of national life h.ave ~ecently endorsed a ~taiement on the 
importance of a national consensus on family planning. We are always 
receptive to new ideas and suggestions. Let us get together for consultations. 
Can we not agree on incentives and disincentives, on effective schemes and 
the best way to reach the people? 
I take this opportunity to urge all 
political parties and groups to place fa1nily planning above sectional politics 
and to recognize it as one of our foremost national priorities, demanding 
the wholehearted allegiance and co-operation of all. Population is a human 
problem, it is an issue of the quality of life. 

I welcome the lead our MPs have taken in calling 

this National 
Conference. 
I have pleasure in inaugurating it and hope. that it will signal 
the start of a new mass consciousness, of determination and of effective 
action. 

Towards a People's Movement 
MY vrnws ON health and fainily planning are well known and have often 

been repeated even in the last few months. We here are already converted. 
The question before us is how we can convert others in large enough numbers 

Inaugural address at the Seventh fohu Conference of the Centrni Council of Health and 
the Central Family Welfare Council, New Delhi, June 15, 1981 

HEALTH, FAMJ;LY PLANNING AND SOCIAL WELFARE 

not only in favour of family planning but even· in favour of ordinary 
elementary health care. 

Health is the starting point of all welfare. The health of the nation 
depends on the health of the individuals. Without it we can have no 
progress in any direction that would be enduring or meaningful. So, the 
provision of adequate health services is one of the first responsibilities of 
any Government. 

The main task before this conference is to examine the National 
Programme of Health For All which is before you and which has been 
drawn up in the context of the global programme of the World Health 
Organization for better health for all by the year 2000. 

To me it seems that the first thing is to develop health consciousness 
amongst all sections of our people, not the least amongst those who are in 
responsible positions. 
In this I include even doctors. We. have capable, 
well-trained doctors who go out to treat diseases .. But there isn't that 
consciousness of seeing whether the neighbourhood in which they the1nselves 
live is conducive to healthy living, or they have created that feeling in the 
people they meet or the patients they treat. so; whatwe rieed is a n1assive 
people's movement which brings into focus the things which some of us 
take for granted but which unfortunately the large majority of our people, 
even if they are aft1uent, even ifthey have all the opportunities; do not always 
take care about. 

Health programmes must be an integral part of our general national 
relationship 
development. Our ancients rightly emphasised the close 
between m.ind, emotions and the body. Each reacts on the other. 
It is 
necessary, hence, to create the right atmosphere as well as the physical 
conditions for good health. 

1'1y own party is deeply committed to <J. National Health Policy. The 
Health Ministry has prepared three drafts :for the consideration of this 
I hope there will be frank and constructive discussion on 
conference. 
them so 
important policy 
statements. 

that final shape can be given to 

these 

Our attitude to health musfchange. Everyone should recognize that 
health is not luck or chance but must be worked for everyday of one's life. 
And I can say this from personal lmowledge and personal experience. Every 
now and then people ask me how I am able to bear the strain. Well, for 
the simple reason that I have prepared for it all my life and I continue to 
do so. 
I can tell you that one week's negligence shows in one's efficiency 
and in one's capability. 

Of course, there are many unforseen situations where disease strikes. 
But, for the most part, good health is a result of an attitude to life as well 
as of good habits. These habits are mostly inculcated by three sets of 
people-.parents, teachers and doctors. We cannot leave it to the doctors 
altogether. 

Education, agriculture, planning for industries or for science and 
technology, vigilance and high standards as regards food and drugs, the 
use of pesticides, the use of fertilizers-all these n1ust be included in our 
plans, in the overall plan for a more healthy nation. There are infections 
due to dirt which may be the result of under-development and poverty, 
but they can be equally caused by industrial development. 

We are taking some measures with regard to air and water pollution; 
I think it is high time that we give some 

but not yet noise pollution. 
consideration to that as well. 

Diet, of course, forms a very important pa1i. We all talk about 
nutrition, but just the other day I was reading that in our country where 
vegetarianism is so widely practised, the consumption of vegetables is quite 
low. Also, we seem to think that only expensive vegetables fulfil our various 
needs of minerals, protein, etc. There are many things growing in villages 
· a!).d on the 1nountains which can be used for nutrition, especially for small 
children ,vho 11eed greens. · Health planning n1ust take account of what 
is available locally. · It. is no use presc.ribii1g something which has to be . 
got from across the· country. 

· The best treatment is prevention, as in war the greatest victory is not 
to have any war at all. 
In our country, even.those who have the means 
do not usually have a balanced meal. They 111ay eat too much, but it is not 
It does not provide them with the 1ninimum nutrients they need 
balanced. 
in some areas, while they may have an excess in others. So, the right 
attitudes have 
inculcated from · the earliest childhood, from 
kindergarten, through the mother and child care centres. 

to be 

Our doctors also have to be motivated to go to areas where they are 

most needed: the rural areas, hills, forest areas. 

Education, formal as welt as in its 'Yidest sense, is the very base for this 
purpose. The child must be taught about hygiene, sanitation, general 
• cleanliness of person and of surroundings. And, in this, adults must 
obviously set a good example. Even our hospitals leave much to be desired, 
to say nothing of municipalities and other such bodies. The basics of health 
must be an integral part of the school curriculum but it must also figure in 
adult education or continuing education. 

Many of the diseases which afflict us are basically social and economic 
in origin, even if the immediate medical causes may be some germ or the 
other. Econoniically weak countries have more health needs. Also they 
suffer from a greater lack of resources as well as of the professional and 
administrative infrastructure. This does not mean that advanced nations 
hav~ no health problems or that they are doing everything they could for 
their own people. Affluence generates its own stresses and ailments. And 
medicine is becoming increasingly costlier in the richer countries where many 
are still deprived of proper treatment. -We. find that if the' poor cannot 
afford cure, the rich often invite disease. 

Even if we spend ten times more than we are now doing in India, we 
cannot give all the medical protection that our people need; but we are in 
a position to attack and eradicate some ancient scourges. 

The Minister has spoken of communicable diseases. Recently, we 
have been able to wipe out smallpox. We are now in a position to launch 
an all-out war against leprosy~ We must rid our country of leprosy in the 
next twenty years. This is a task that I would like to set for our Central 
and State Ministries and to the entire medical profession. 

Similarly, we should enlarge our efforts for the cure and prevention of 

blindness. 

This does not lessen the dangers of other diseases but it · is more 

effective to focus on one or two while not neglecting the others. 

Then, of course, 

-is 

the question of population control. 

It is a 
controversial one, although I am glad to say that more and more people 
It 
are realizing the dangers of our population overflowing our shores. 
. is not only a question of feeding them. For some years to come, we shaU 
• have greater agricultural production 
than people. But children .. and · 
grown-ups need many things besides just grains; they ri eed a better balanced 
diet; they need greater care, houses, clothing, employment and so on. So, 
the need to slow do,vn the rate of growth of our population is most urgent. 

.-:· f 

Health and family planning are not a fall-out of development but 
If our dreams and our programmes for a better 
an indispensable input. 
life for our people are to be realized, the birth rate must be brought down. 
I am not advocating this for any cold statistical reasons but because the 
everyday lives of so many millions are involved. Every man, woman and 
child must have a better chance in life in terms of food, shelter, education, 
employment and physical, aesthetic and spiritual fulfilment. This will be 
possible only ifpopulatio:1 growth is much smaller than the overall economic 
growth. . Our people n1ust be educated to understand the importance of 
small families and to adopt the means to limit conception. The objective 
of a birth rate of 21 per thousand and a death rate of g·per thousand by 
A.D. 2000 is desirable and practical and we must achieve it. 

Our recent census is a warning but it also shows that we can coi1trol 
the population. Short-sighted politics should not be allowed to interfere. 
All classes, all religions, all sections of the people must be approached 
tactfully, gently but firmly. Where can we accommodate the extra numbers? 
The size of available land cannot increase nor will there be more rain from 
the sky or more water in our rivers. As we grow more grain, the number of 
trees and other health giving things decreases. And above all, how can we 
promise our children's children the schools and the jobs they need, and. 
the open spaces and the peace of mind that will allow them for more 
joyful living? 

We were the very first nation to adopt family planning as part of 
official policy. Even though our efforts have resulted in the prevention of 

,. r.-.). 

a substantial number of births, we must admit that the success we had hoped 
for has eluded us. The time has come to treat this as a problem of our very 
survival. This conference must give further shape to a national policy of 
family planning based on the principle of voluntary participation which 
we can now implement with determination and dedication. 

A proposal has come that we should change 

the name back from 
Family Welfare to Family Planning. But it is up to you to decide. 
I am 
not expressing a view one way or the other. But I do not think that changing 
names makes much difference. What is needed is inculcating this attitude, 
this sense of urgency 
in all Government Departments and amongst 
our people. 

The census has jolted even sceptics to face facts and at least on this 
one question there is the beginning of a national consensus. 
I s.uggest that 
in the States, Chief Ministers should head special committees on family· 
planning· which are supported by Committees of Secretaries. Collectors 
also should be entrusted with direct responsibility for programmes at the 
disfrict · level. · · Special attention should be given to those· districts where 
the programme has so far lagged behind. 

The Sixth Plan proposes 40,000 more Family Planning Centres; Can 
such infrastructural facilities be further increased and the programme of 
training auxiliary nurses and midwives enlarged? · It would be good to 
have a village health guide in each village who should preferably be living 
in the village itself and be able to command the respect and confidence of 
tlie entire rural community. 

Essentially, family planning is a very personal matter. The programme 
cannot succeed if it remains an official one or in the hands of even the most 
It has to grow into a mass 
. dedicated social workers who live in cities. 
:movement with the fullest participation of voluntary organizations. And 
we must try and encourage more and more voluntary organizations, even 
though their programmes might deal with. other subjects, to include this in 
their programme. In the matter of 1notivation, voluntary workers are always 
more effective than government agencies. 
I should like to assure the fullest 
possible official support to voluntary organization~ in this work. 

Family planning is not an isolated programme to help the census 
enumerator or to lighten the burden of Yojana Bhawan planners. 
It is 
a key to every individual's and every family's betterment. 
It is also part 
of the right of women to be in full health and to use their gifts to bring up 
healthier, better looked-after children, to have 1nore attractive homes, to 
develop their personalities and find deeper fulfilment in their lives. 

From our own vast field experience we have linked family planning 
with mother and child health care. 
I should like to draw your attention to 
the constitutional directive to raise the socio-economic condition of the 
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other weaker sections of society 
and those who find themselves in a weak position not merely because of 

caste or religion but because of economic conditions. State governments 
should give primary health care facilities on a priority basis in areas which 
have a concentration of Scheduled Castes and Tribes. 

With the advance in medical science, there is increasing specialization. 
Doctors, like other scientists, naturally prefer sophisticated equipment. 
We do not wish to deny them this. But, in our circumstances, this does 
take them further and further away from the social realities of our country. 
Medical services must be in tune with our cultural tradition. Western 
models of medical administration have not always proved uniformly successful 
in all parts of developing countries. We must balance sophisticated large 
urban hospitals which cater only for the elite at the cost of the Minimum 
Needs Programme with a larger programme for the development of a sound 
health infrastructure in the rural areas. 

We cannot deny ourselves the latest findings of knowledge. Nor need 
we have misgivings about going to the end of the earth to bring medicines 
for our people. But we must remember that we have time-tested traditional 
remedies and regimens of care and cure in every region of our country. We 
should not. hesitate to adopt them after scientifically proving their efficacy. 
Indigenous household cures for common ailments should find a proper place 
in our national health endeavour, especially in those fields or those ailments 
where allopathic medicine has not yet provided any relief. There must be. 
a greater dialogue and debate amongst members of the different systems 
of medicine: allopathic, homoeopathic, Ayurvedic, Unani, Yogsidha, etc. 

There is a vast army of self-employed persons who can provide curative 
services to our people through traditional systems of medicine. But I 
must also warn that in this country-perhaps in others too-practically 
everybody considers himself or herself a doctor. We must beware of this 
sort of treatment. We must upgrade the knowledge and talent of village 
vaids and hakims. The noted psychiatrist, Carstair, pointed out some time 
ago that even our much maligned village witch doctors can be utilized to 
improve the mental health service. 

Greater use of indigenous cures will also help us combat the increasing 
cost of modern health services. . Health for the masses has got to be 
inexpensive. Because of high pressure salesmanship by multi national 
drug companies we are brainwashed into believing that there is a magic in 
brand names. Medical education should lay greater stress on preventing 
our doctors and our patients from being taken in by such advertising. 

The brightest amongst our young men and women join medical courses. 
However, our system of education seems to condition them in favour of 
elitist medicine. The ailments of the common people hardly interest them. 
There is a case for specialist post-graduation requiring longer years in colleges. 
But disease cannot be walled off and we must heed the cry of our villages 
and towns for field doctors and healers, even to protect those who go to the 
more sophisticated hospitals. Those in charge of medical education should 

bestir themselves and change the system of education to suit our national 
needs rather than the needs of affluent countries. 

While on this subject, I should like once again to emphasise the urgency 
of ending the unhealthy practice of charging capitation fees for admission 
to MBBS courses by private medical colleges. 

As I said earlier, our doctors and nurses are not over-anxious to serve 
in rural and tribal areas. One reason can be that the present method of 
admission gives undue advantage to urban upper class candidates. After 
graduation they want to work and live in metropolitan areas. We should 
give more serious thought to the system of incentives for rural services. A 
Soviet Minister told me that in his country rural doctors are pai:d more 
than urban doctors. 
impressed by the suggestion in one of the 
docu1nents that internship should be in district and small town hospitals. 
We shall have a Cabinet Committee for reviewing the progress. You 
might also look into the suggestion whether there should be a family planning 
advisory board which will especially pursue progress in family planning in 
different parts of the country. · 

I was 

I have pleasure. in inaugurating the Joint Conference of the Central 
Councils of Health and Family Welfare.· I hope it will view the panorama· 
of health with breadth of vision and . devise measures to achieve the goal 
of reasonable health for all in the next twenty years. 

The National Heart Institute 
IT GIVES ME great pleasure to be here. Dr Padmavati has already told you 
of the great need for such an institution in our capital city which will serve, 
we hope, much-·of northern India. The All-India Heart Foundation has 
been doing important work with quiet efficiency for nearly two decades. 
Today, with the inauguration of the National Heart Institute, it takes upon 
itself more responsibilities. 

I am glad to participate in this function. 

Medical science has made tremendous, I would even say, miraculous 
advance, yet we have not attained deeper understanding and we are far 
from knowing enough about the body or the mind. And the heart, of course, 
is at the very core. 

Heart disease, as you all know, is today the greatest killer in the Western 
world. 
It is difficult to say whether the incidence of heart disease has really 
grown because of the stress of modern life, as we think, or whether better 
statistics have made us aware of the reality. Next to heart disease perhaps 

From speech at the inauguration of the National Heart Institute, New Delhi, August 20, 1981 

HEALTH, FAMiLY PLANNING AND SOCIAL WELFARE 

are road accidents and 'cancer. 
In' India, we do not yet know the exact 
dimensions . of these problems. But with increasing sophistication, 
industrialization and rising emotional tensions in daily life, such a situation 
may w~ll overtake us unless we take appropriate and urgent measures. 

As of today the treatment of heart disease tends to be prolonged, 
cumbersome and expensive. Research in heart disease and surgical 
procedures for heart ailment are the most sophisticated and cost-intensive 
areas of therapy. As such, 
this treatment remains the preserve of a few 
wealthy persons. Medical researchers should try to find cheaper n1ethods 
of treatment which would be within the reach of the average person. Because 
of the attention paid to heart disease in the West, it should not be imagined 
th.at it is au ailment merely of the affluent sections. The poor are equally 
susceptible. Very widespread in India, as you just heard, is rheumatic heart 
disease-especially among children and younger people. 
I am told that 
six million children suffer from it. 

From our point of view, .. where funds are so extremely limited, it is 

important to ensure that our resources are. properly · utilized and to the · · 
maximum advantage of our people.· We should develop institutions which 
have all the implements necessary for the diagnosis and treatment, including 
It has often been noticed that in our desire to 
surgery, under one roof. 
develop several institutions at the same time, we tend to spread our resources 
thinly. So, no institution becomes complete in itself. The patients do 
not benefit nor can expertise grow. 

It is interesting to find that while treatment of heart disease is so advanced 
and sophisticated, the simple rules of health and certain precautions do go 
If someone's parep.ts suffered from 
a long way in mitigating suffering. 
hypertension or diabetes, he should have himself checked for these ... In 
fact, as you know, I am a great believer in having compulsory health check-ups 
for all people. Obviously, we cannot start with individuals all over the 
country. But I do hope-I am speaking especially to the Health Minister 
wb.o is sitting in front of me-we can make a start by having compulsory 
check-ups in industrial establislun,ents, schools, colleges and other organiza-
tions, where large numbers of people are together, so that not only heart 
disease but diseases such as leprosy, for instance, can be diagnosed at a 
stage when treatment and cure can not only be easier but sometimes complete. 
The celebrated U.S. heart specialist, Paul Dudley White, who did 
so much for the heart movement, stressed the importance of walking, cycling 
and other physical activity as preventives of heart disease. The desire for 
soft living, the lure of what is known as the good things of life, even though 
they may be dangerous, and the consumption of over-rich foods . and 
drinks, are responsible for heart disease in the affluent countries. In India, 
the people try to avoid exercise as far as they can and we find even students 
dodging the periods in colleges and so on. If negligence is the cause of 
heart disease in affluent countries, ignorance is the main cause in ours. 

Also, no less important than the skill of the doctor and the availability 
of the right drugs and equipment is the willingness and full co-operation 
of the patient .. Not only doctors, but all people, educated or otherwise, 
must join hands in a movement of health education. We need mass action 
to eradicate insanitary conditions and superstitions and to inculcate healthy 
habits. Lack of money is not to blame; what is unfortunately missing is 
a sense of responsibility. 

The Heart Foundation has been doing pioneering work in public health 
education through its bulletin, through its booklets, through lectures and 
It has also been 
talks, through the 'keep fit' exercises it has developed 
training young doctors in cardiology and conducting refresher courses for 
older doctors. As I said earlier, medical check-up services for schools, 
banks and companies and heart camps in villages are most valuable. 

Government's resources and services are stretched to the full and they 
need to be supplemented by the voluntary efforts of doctors and public 
spirited citizens supported .by banks .. In. the. administration of treatment 
and progress of.research . in the specialised areas of medicine, voluntary .·· 
organizations have an important role to play, And here I would like to· 
say a word of appreciation fcir those who have donated s·o generously to 
this project. Governmental agencies function under certain constraints 
of rules, regulations and also traditions. Voluntary organizations allow 
for experimentation with newer ideas and can break fresh grounds. These 
organisations can help to heighten the awareness of the people of their own 
health problems and can ensure popular participation in the solution of 
such problems. But we must see that such institutions do not develop 
unhealthy rivalry with public effort, rather they should supplement and 
complement governmental efforts. The institute, I an1 told, will handle 
100 patients daily in this branch of specialization and of these 40 per cent 
will be treated free of charge. 

I hope that this institute, which is being inaugurate4 today, will serve 
the people-not only cure those who are ill but help to prevent heart diseases 
as far as possible. 

Society and the Disabled 
T HERB IS A great deal of cynicism about the special year which has been 
designated as International Year of the Disabled by 
the United 
Nations, and there is a feeling that apart from such inaugurations and 

Speech inaugurating in India the International Year of the Disabled January 5, 1981 

meetings, nothing much happens. This, of course, is hardly the fault of 
the United Nations. Such 'Years' are one way of focussing world-wide 
attention on the problems of special groups of people and set in motion 
activities which may not. otherwise be adequate or satisfactory, and introduce 
worthwhile programmes. 
that attention was drawn 
to the multi-faceted problems of the handicapped through this International 
Year of the Disabled Persons. 

It was high time 

Disablement is of many kinds. A handicap may be congenital, it may 
be the consequence of an illness or it may come about.as a result of injury, 
war, rioting or other violence. But in 
this age of technology, many 
disabilities are caused by road and air accidents or in working with machinery. 
We do not yet have figures ot other full information regarding our own 
handicapped people, but the United Nations takes 10 per cent of the total 
population of every country as handicapped. Ten per cent of the population 
is a huge figure, especially in India. With our present resources we cannot 
possibly provide all the care. to all of them or even a small part of the.in. 
Yet we. must acknowledge our duty towards them and make a beginning .. 
. Some work has been .done. We have a three per cent reservation in 
public employment, and in spite of extreme limitation of resources; we 
have increased scholarships for the disabled people almost a hundredfold. 
A twelfth of the Central Government Budget on Social Welfare goes for the 
rehabilitation of the handicapped. 
I am deeply conscious that neither this 
nor the various national institutions for the blind and the handicapped 
are anywhere near adequate. The blind and deaf and mute do have 
organizations to speak for them but there are many other kinds of handicaps 
which are little known and facilities for which are either non-existent or 
negligible. 

I baid earlier about our not having the full statistics, but we are making 
an effort in the 1981 census to cover tbe totally handicapped, eithei: totally 
blind, totally dumb or anything like this. We are also having a &pecial sample 
survey of the handicapped through 
the National Sample Survey 
Organization. 

Many handicapped people are on the live registers but their number 
is very small compared to the total. Of these, a large number have been 
provided employment and we think that the rest will be covered this year. 
But, as I said, it is a very small proportion of the total. 

In the exhibition which has been organised here, . we have just seen 
paintings by spastic children and foot and mouth artists, candles and other 
handicrafts made by blind and other disabled, physically or mentally 
disabled children. All this work is highly commendable and I hope that 
all of us here and many others will help to find a growing market for 
such products. 

We are.taking special measures to improve safety in mines and to ensure 
that in designing machinery special care is taken to minimise any possible 

hazards. 
countryside. 

Initially, threshing n1achines caused many accidents in our 

Some dangers are avoidable but there is a certain indiscipline in our 
ways, and I am sorry to say, not much thought is given for inconvenience 
caused to others. Some matters are exceedingly trivial and perhaps should 
not be mentioned in an audience like this but I do want to draw attention 
to them because they all add up to undesirable state of affairs. 

Habits, each one small in itself, can cause trouble. For instance, if 
a banana skin or other foodstuffs are strewn about, people slip and get hurt. 
Besides, they attract flies and spread disease. We also do not give attention 
to quarantine and such elementary health precautions in cases of infectious 
and contagious diseases. 

Because of complete lack of traffic sense and also because of negligent 
driving, not only on the part of truck or car drivers but even people who 
drive scooters, bicycles and so on, people get killed 011 our roads in increasing 
numbers. There is . jay-walking which means that people. walk anywhere. 
on the road> They. also rush towards or between moving vehicles and ate 
gen,erally careless in handling machinery and other equipment. 

So much for India. What about the industrialized; advanced nations? 
I am sure you have heard of victims of the drug thalidomide which 
causes the birth of armless children, and of the deformities caused by certain 
chemicals, not only to the sprayers but tragically affecting their unborn 
children also. 

\Ve have launched national campaig11s for the prevention of blindness, 
polio and leprosy. Leprosy not only defonns but gives rise to big 
psychological problems. 
It is now well within our ability, medically and 
administratively, to eradicate this disease. But early diagnosis is crucial. 
If only people could be educated to give up their prejudices as regards this 
dreaded disease and 
those who are affected are willing to 
admit to. it in the very early stages, this can be quickly and completely 
cured. 

if only 

Fifteen per cent of our blindness, I am told, is preventible, merely by 
including green vegetables and edible leaves in the diet of children or by 
taking simple eyecare. 

I am glad that the number of eye camps organized by official and 
voluntary organisations are increasing in number and providing relief to 
invalid people. 

Polio, I think, can now be avoided by taking preventive steps, and 
we all know that President Roosevelt was a polio victim but he could keep 
a very strenuous daily routine. Another case, not of polio but of paralysis, 
is of Mary Verghese, a brilliant young doctor in Vellore Hospital, who 
had gone for a picnic; the bus overturned and she broke her spine. But she 
went through rigorous training and is an internationally known surgeon. 
She .operates sitting in a wheel-chair. 

We have passed legislation to help the handicapped and will not 

hesitate to do again whenever necessary. 
hensive care for the handicapped, the Ministry of Social Welfare is thinking 
of a basic law on different aspects of the rehabilitation of the disabled. 
However, legislation is of limited help. 

In order to give more compre-

Apart from the legal aspect, there should be more widespread recognition 
ainongst likely employers that the disabled can be full members of society. 
If they cannot tackle one job, they are capable of something else and should 
not be deprived of the opportunity to support themselves. They do not 
It is their right as 
ask for, nor should anything be done out of charity. 
citizens, and it is in the country's interest. Sometimes, children and even 
grown-ups thoughtlessly ridicule the disabled or deformed people. This 
is cruel and must not be allowed. 

What is essential is to create public consciousness, not in the sense of 
pity but compassion, which is deeper and which leads to positive action. 
I feel strongly that this awareness and concern should be created from the 
earliest stages of education and our children sho_uld be taught about health 
.. education, road sense, cleanliness and other preventive action and these 

should form· a part of our textbooks. 

Voluntary organizations can help a great deal in bringing about such 
a psychological change in society. 
I hope that the International Year of 
Disabled Persons will be used as a year when government, voluntary agencies 
and individuals will work jointly to transform the outlook of the general 
public and to inculcate in disabled people themselves hope, courage and 
the determination to succeed. 

This Year of the Disabled is really a salute to the indomitable spirit 
of man. It is one of the miracles of Nature, how handicapped people develop 
other senses and can do all manner of work with or even witho.ut training. 
I think you know that the great composer Beethoven composed some of 
his most w<;mderful work when he was totally deaf. Homer was blind. 
The humorist, James Thurber, wa's quite blind towards the end of his life but 
he went on drawing and writing. One of my teachers, the artist Binod Bihari 
Mukherjee, who recently died, could see only very little, even when he was 
teaching us, only by putting his papers very close to his eyes. Afterwards 
he was almost totally blind, but he continued to paint and to teach. 

I am often asked which great person has unpressed me the most. Great 

men and women naturally 1nake an impact on their times and earn their · 
place in history. But I do feel deeply moved and impressed by the enormous 
courage and physical strain which so many of the handicapped undergo 
in order to hold their own in this highly competitive and often cruel world. 
The lives of these people, mostly anonymous and unsung, are no less heroic 
than many famous ones. Some names are known. You know of Helen 
Keller. How, in spite of being blind, deaf and dumb, she trained herself_ 
to read, to lecture and she was guest in this House (Teen Murti House) and 

I remember her visit. She had already read all my father's books and when 
I greeted her, she got off the car, she felt my face and immediately said : 
"You are Indira." 

Another great favourite inspirer was a young man called Douglas 
Border. 
I do not know whether you have heard of his story. He was 
a young pilot who, during the last World War, lost both his legs above the 
thighs, but he felt that his life was flying. He was in the Air Force and he 
was determined to remain in the Air Force. And after taking his training, 
the commander said, "Well, you can fly but we are very sorry 
that the rules of the Air Force do not allow us to take you back." He said, 
"You make your tests n1ore difficult for me than they normally are. 
If 
I pass them, you have no right to deny me." He not only passed, he brought 
down 152 German planes. He was a squadron leader. He was shot down 
and made a prisoner. He escaped three times from his prison and finally 
was rescued by the Americans when they came into France, . His young 
wife pleaded with him that he had done enough for his country, but he said, 
"The wat is not over. . I am a member of the Air Force.''. And, ultimately, 
· when Victory Day vias celebrated, he led the parade in the plan~ and all of 
· London came out to salute him: There are many others. None of those 
people asked for help, nor was it given. By sheer grit and perseverance they 
rose to the top and will remain shining examples for all time. 

I am glad to formally inaugurate the International Year of the Disabled 
Persons in India. May it be the harbinger of new opportunities for these 
brave people, and may we also have the will and inculcate it in those who 
do not have the desire to help them and to build up the institutions, give 
them the equipment and the training which is their due. 

As I said, some handicaps are known. 

Just a week ago, I had two very 
young mothers, both of handicapped children, and they said that although 
they had gone to many institutes in India, nobody could. even telf them what 
was wrong with their children. And they said they were willing to meet the 
challenge and the1nselves start some place which could provide fuller 
examination of the children, so that they could go on to specialized 
institutions where they could get more help. 
I hope this Year will urge all 
citizens to look into their hearts and to see how they can help to promote 
this worthy cause. 

Helping the Physically Handicapped 

THE QUALITY OF a society 
is judged by the care it takes of the most 
disadvantaged sections-the aged, the very ill and, above all; the mentally 
or physically handicapped. In olden days the family bore some responsibility 
but, generally, the handicapped were regarded as a burden on the fa1nily 
and society. As family ties loosen, the 
responsibility of society and 
Government grows. Especially so since we now know how far even a 
little assistance goes to transform many of the handicapped into useful 
and even creative citizens. Unfortunately, our country does not have the 
resources to provide comprehensive social security to the needy. The task 
has to be undertaken through a partnership between voluntary organizations 
and official agencies. Governmental departments tendto become rule-ridden · 
and insensitive. What the handicapped individual requires is sympathetic 

· · understandilig which voluntary workers can better provide. 

The Fellowship of the Physically Handicapped has done com1nendable 
work in Bombay in creating public consciousness regarding problems of 
the handicapped and in providing them concrete help. 

Woman and Her Role in Society 

QUESTION : Madam Prime Minister, you belong to the history of two 
generations and times-the time when woman was oppressed and Gandhiji 
spoke or'her emancipation, and today when woman has achieved freedom 
and recognition, besides winning many a legal right, how would you 
summarize your experience of these different times? 

PRIME MINISTER : There never was a time in India when some women were 
not emancipated and there isn't a place in the world where some wo1nen 
are not oppressed. This is equally true of men. 
· What is needed is an 
attitude of mind which looks at human beings as individuals each of whom 
has something to teach and something to learn, instead of labelling them 
according to sex, caste, religion, colour of skin or any other such category. 

Message for the silver jubilee celebrations of the Fellowship of the Physically Handicapped, 
Bombay, March 28, 1981 
Interview for the programme 'Woman and Her Role in Socieiy' broadcast from the Radio 
Sarajevo, Yugoslavia, March 8, 1980 

. l r 

In contemporary India, there are far more oppo1tunities for men and 
for women, and a larger number of women are taking part in different spheres 
of national activity. Tb ere is also greater acceptance of women as workers 
and colleagues, but time and again one does come across prejudices and the . 
chauvinistic approach. 

QUESTION : As the leader of the largest democracy in the world elected by 
men and women alike who have traditionally worshipped woman as a goddess 
but neglected her in day-to-day life, how do you envisage wo111an's role in 
a progressing society like ours? 

PRIME MINISTER : Women comprise half our population. How can we 
neglect their talent and capability in nation-building? How can women 
· themselves lead full lives if they r.emain aloof? And, finally, can man be 
compfote withoµt the full support of woman? 

· Wo1nan in India has a. special role. She is the upholder of tradition 
and she must also be usher Tor 'modernity. · Her task is to be a .vehicle for· 
social reform and the bringii.'i.g in of a new society. 

QUESTION : \Vomen have been tremendously inspired by you and many 
have succeeded in different fields. But are you fully happy with woman's 
status in our present society? 

PRIME MINISTER : When Indian society as a whole is still under privileged, 
how can we be satisfied with the status of women? Even in advanced 
societies, generally speaking, whether in marriage or in jobs, women are at 
a disadvantage. 

QUESTION : What is your opinion of us the post-independence generation? 
What role do you see for us as responsible daughters of a great n~!ion? 

PRIME MINISTER : This generation has a tremendous responsibility. Growing 
knowledge and the attainment of more rights and privileges also increase 
the area of duties. Have we the capacity to digest knowledge and skill 
and use them for worthwhile purposes? Women do influence social 
attitudes. Let this influence be used in the' larger cause of the nation and to 
build a better society. We need love of country and patriotism which is not 
narrow but which leads to universality and concern for the whole world. 

QUESTION : And, lastly, Madam, what views would you like to share with 
women all over the world on this Women's International Day? 

PRIME MINISTER : I send my good wishes to women all over the world. 
Many problems are common and some are special to different regions 

or countries. Let us not be diverted by small issues or peripheral 
matter·s from our main task of working for peace and understanding which 
is the basis for any true progress. 

True Liberation of Women 
FoR SEVERAL DECADES the AU-India \Vomen's Conference has been the 
organized voice of the women of India. 
I have never been a member of 
any women's organization but have been interested enough to keep track 
of their activities and to lend the helping hand whenever I could. 

I am glad that at lm1g last the All-India Women's Conference has a 
home of .its own and it is. named after· one of the best known and most 
remarkable women of our times, Sarojini Naidu, feminine to the core but 
wen abie to hold her owri in the' world of men, ,vhether in letters or in 
politics. 

To add to the importance of the occasion and to give it a touch of 
elegance, we have in our midst His Highness the Aga Khan and Her Highness 
the Begum Aga Khan. They are friends of India and have founded or 
encouraged many projects for education, health and other aspects of welfare. 
But for their timely and generous help, this complex ,.vould not have been 
ready today. Nor would we have before us the attractive Aga Khan Hali. 
We welcome them and wish them well in their work. 

I see before me a number of eminent women who have distinguished 
themselves h1 various professions-· in social work, in education, in science, 
m administration, in law and, of course, in politics. They must all feel 
gratified to see the completion of this building. 

I have often said that I am not a feminist. Yet, in 1ny concern for the 
underprivileged, how can I ignore women who, since the beginning of history, 
have been dominated over and discriminated against in social customs and 
in laws. How insidious and all-pervasive is this attitude of male' superiority 
is revealed in the vocabulary of the languages the world over. And this is 
unquestioningly accepted and acquiesced in by all but a minuscule minority 
of men and also women. Currently I am reading a book titled 
'World 
and Women'. 
I learned from it what Mr Ling White, the President of 
Mills College in the USA, wrote of the use of masculine generic_pronouns. 
I quote: "The penetration of the habit of language into the minds of little 
girls as they grow up to be women is more profound than~most people, 

Speech at the inauguration of the AU-India Women's Conference buildinfcomplex, 
New Delhl, March 26, 1980 

including most women, have realized. For, 
it implies that personality is 
really a male attribute and that women are a sub or a human sub-species." 
The author goes on to say that it is time we looked more carefully where the 
thoughtless use of stereotypes is taking us. "Man as leader, woman as 
follower; man as producer, woman as consumer; man as strength, woman 
as weakness; this is the cosmography that has brought us to man as 
aggressor and humanity the victim." 

Hence, by excluding women, men are depriving themselves of a fuller 

emancipation or growth for themselves. 

In the West, women's so-called freedo1n is often equated with imitation 
of man. Frankly, I feel that is merely an exchange of one kind of bondage 
for another. To be liberated, woman must feel free to be herself, not in 
rivalry to man but in the context of her own capacity and her personality. 
We need women to be more interested, more alive and more active not because 
they are women but because they do comprise half of the human race . 
. Whether they like it or not, they cannot escape their responsibility nor should 
they be denied its benefits. 
Indian women are traditionally conservative 
but they also b.ave. the genius of sy~thesis, to adapt and to absorb. That 
is what gives them resilience to face suffering and to meet upheavals with 
. a degree of calm, to change constantly and yet remain changeless, which 
is the quality of India herself. 

Today's major concerns are: first, economic and social inequality and 
injustice between the affluent and developing countries and within countries. 
Secondly, the anxiety whether human wisdom will prevail over what can 
only be called a death wish in which the desire to dominate expresses itself 
in countless ways, the most dangerous being the armament race. And, 
thirdly, the need to protect this, our only Earth, from human rapacity and 
exploitation. Only recently have we awakened to the a~areness of ancient 
truths regarding our own utter dependence on the balance of Nature and its 
resources. 

These enormous challenges cannot be met only by some sections, however 
advanced they may be, while others pull in different directions or watch 
apathetically. The effort has to be a universal one, conscious and concerted, 
considering no one too small to contribute. The effort must embrace all 
nationalities and all classes regardless of religion, caste or sex. 

There is no time to lose and it involves a tremendous task of educating. 
We want to walk together and in step with all others, but if men hesitate, 
should not women show the way? 

So, while 

complimenting 

the All-India Women's Conference, 
especially its President, Smt. Lakshmi Raghuramaiah, on their achievements, 
I dedicate to the nation this.building complex of the All-India Women's 
Conference. 

Bringing Up a Child 
OuR PEOPLE LOVE children, but often enough this love is displayed in heaping 
the child with sweets and toys, and he seldom gets the understanding and 
training so necessary to enable him to grow into a mature adult. The 
affluent nations provide many more facilities and have fewer economic 
problems. Yet, we find that children there have their own problems, in 
many ways more complex than ours. 

Bach child is an individual who has to be helped to develop his 
personality. His problems of health, nutrition or labour can be solved only 
by an in-depth study of local conditions. If a child, because of poverty or 
inclination, .needs to work, I do not think we should debar him. On the 
· contrary, we should en.able him to earn but in conditions which are not 
injurious to his health, education or growth. 

· Education should aim at giving the child self-confidence and self-reliance 
as well as knowledge of the world around him, beginning with his own locality 
and State. Learning is a lifelong process. The home should complement 
the class-room and vice versa. Concern for people, animals and the 
environment as well as basic rules of cleanliness and health should be 
inculcated in the child from babyhood itself. There should be a conscious 
effort at developing good taste by exposure to the world's great art and 
literary masterpieces. The attitude of mind is almost more important than 
anything else. The child no less than the adult must grow up with the 
feeling that no one can receive withqut givip.g, that privilege must be matched 
by obligation. 

To come to an immediate programme, let us make our children aware 

of the urgency, utility and joy of planting trees. 

Women Should Face Challenge 
I AM SPECIALLY happy that the occasion for this meeting is a women's rally. 

I believe this is the first time there has been such a huge women's procession 
and rally. 

Message sent on October 18, 1980 to the Indian Council for Child Welfare, New Delhi, 
Speech at a women's rally at Thekkinkadu Maidan, Trichur, Kerala, November 10, 1980 

The women of Kerala have always been in the vanguard, whether it 
was politics, social welfare, literature or the arts, or the society as a whole. 
Today our country, as indeed the rest of the world, is in the midst of crisis. 
Everywhere the voice for women's emancipation is being raised. But here 
you do not need it, for you have always been emancipated. But we do 
need that the women and the men of Kerala; young and old, take an interest 
in what is happening here and in other parts of the country so that they can 
guide events; they can help in the development, they can help in the formation 
of the new India which our great leaders dreamt of and for which we have 
been struggling and working these long years. 

From the beginning, the Congress struggled not only for political freedom, 
but for economic freedom, for cultural freedom, for freedom of the individual. 
And, for us this freedom did not mean copying any other country or any 
other system or any other path; it 1neant making an Indian road, improving 
· the Indian . personality so that we could bring equality and justice in our 
society without sacrificing what is of value in it. 

· Many systems have been tried in different countries. But there is hardly 

a country in the world which is not in the· midst of difficulties:. econo1nic · 
difficulties, rising prices; rising unemploy1nent and many problen1s. Women 
of those countries are specially suffering. Even a country so much praised 
for the Marxist path, praised by the Marxist and latterly praised even by the 
capitalist countries for its progress and its discipline; we now discover, has 
to turn to the West for economic help, 
for technological know-how and 
many other things. And as soon as the old strangleholds weakened and the 
people had a little greater freedom, the same evils crept into society as 
we read about in other countries. This does not mean that we in India 
have no evils, nor does it mean that we have no difficulties. 
I am onlv 
mentioning this fact because-we tend to be much harsher on our own people 
and our own progress than we are 011 other countries. 

We started off with the greatest misery and abject poverty,lack of justice, 
inequality and discrimination against caste and sections of the people, with 
very backward areas and every other kind of possible hardship. We had 
hardly any agricultural production or industrial production. Most of India 
had very little education. 

But from this background, step by difficult step, we have gone ahead. 
We have built an infrastructure of technology, of engineering, of science 
which has helped our industry to grow and to be diversified. We have 
doubled our agricultural production and we have undertaken special 
programmes to help the weakest and the poorest whether they are on the farms 
or in the villages or in the urban areas. We have taken special steps to help 
the minorities to feel secure and to be able to take advantage of their rights 
under the Constitution. 

Thanks to many social reformers, but especially to our political movement, 
we gave a new respect, new high position and. self-confidence to our 

HEALTH, FA~ULY PLANN~NG AND SOCIAL WELFARE 

womenfolk. Without the participation of women, no programme can be 
successful; and we can neither make progress nor build a new India. 
In 
this long and difficult road, we have met much opposition. There has been 
opposition from the rightist reactionary parties and there has been equally 
vehement obstruction and opposition from the Communists and the 
Marxists. Just over three years ago, our party was defeated at tli,e polls. 
As true democrats, we accepted the verdict of the people. I, as President of 
my party, clearly unreservedly declared that we accept the verdict, that we 
offer our full co-operation to the Government of the day in solving national 
problems and in serving the people. But our offer was rejected and every 
effort was made to stamp out the Congress which was virtually the only 
true Opposition to the Janata Party and the Lok Dal governments. For 
more than a year, the Marxists and others, all supported the Janata Party. 
Afterwards, they criticized their economic policies only because they saw 
the restlessness of the people. But even then within Parliament, they 
continued to support this rightist combination. All these so-called lovers 
of democracy had no compunction in expelling me from Parlian1ent and in • 
harassing other political workers.. 

During the Emergency, some political personages were detained .. · But 
at no time did we try to sta1np out Opposition or destroy any political 
party, as was done during the Janata Party rule and, as I am told by 
my colleagues here, is the effort in Kerala. Everytime I come here or even 
when I am in Delhi, people come to me to speak about their grievances, 
their .difficulties and what they consider the injustice meted out to people 
It seems that minorities 
who do not belong to the ruling party of Kerala. 
feel that they are singled out for such harsh treatment. I draw the attention 
of the Chief Minister and the others to all these complaints. This does 
not mean that in other parts of India there are no grievances. Many things 
ha',!e happened about which we are not happy. We have had communal 
riots, we have rising prices, we have many of the left-overs, the result of 
the wrong policies of the Janata and Lok Dai parties. But I can say with 
great emphasis that all these ov~r 30 years of independence, the Congress 
party has not looked at any problem from party angle. All problems 
concerning the people are looked at from the national point of view. We 
have always tried to take the support of those who are willing to support 
in helping to solve the problems and we have never tried to crush anyone. 
Had we proceeded in that way, the Congress was surely strong enough, 
especially in the early years, not to have allowed any Opposition to grow. 
But we did not do that. 

We are not against any party because it is such and such party. But 
we are against violence, }Y.e. are against communalism, we are against casteism, 
and wherever we see that people are promoting such tensions, we have to 
meet it with all the strength at ottr command. 
It is the duty of every 
Government, and especially the Government of our party, and the country 

which calls itself secular and socialist, 
to combat such evils and to do 
everything possible to safeguard the lives and properties of all, but especially 
of the minorities because they are the weaker and cannot always protect 
themselves. And this applies also to those of any religion or caste who are 
weaker because of poverty or economic circumstances. We cannot allow 
anti-social elements·whether they be smugglers, hoarders or blackmarketeers 
to gain the upper hand, as was unfortunately the case during the Janata Party 
and the Lok Dal rule. At the moment, we are putting all our effort in 
trying to solve these difficult problems and to try to remove the grievances 
of the people. My sympathy is with all those who are suffering. 
I can only 
assure them that we will not rest until we have bettered the situation and 
come to their aid. 

:Now, the women of Kerala have always given me generously of their 
affection. But today I ask for something more. Today, we· need every 
woman to become a fighter, every woman to come forward to face this 
challenge which the world is posing, which the .forces of reaction are posing 
to India; and reaction can be on both sides; left or right .. Don't think that . 
the leftists are not reactionaries. They are reactionaries of a diffe1:ent kind. 
We are the ones who have taken the country on a middle p'ath, an Indian 
path, but a path which is going towards equality and social justice, a path 
that is bringing 1nodernity to India without · sacri.fi.cing its eternal values 
and this is the path which will strengthen our country, which will strengthen 
our womanhood. And, it is in this fight that we want all of you to be non-
violent but strong determined soldiers. 

Nehru and Children 
T IUS DAY HAS been observed as Children's Day for a long time. The 
practice started even during Jawaharlal Nehru's lifetime. 
Initially, we 
used to have a big children's function in the National Stadium. After 
the Teen Murti House became a museum, a new pattern emerged. The 
President will now inaugurate the Science Exhibition which has also become 
more or less an annual feature. Last year it was not held in Delhi, but 
in Bombay. 

I have performed some pleasant tasks here. One was to release a 
stamp designed by the attractive young girl who came before you. The 
second was to release some very attractive cards which, I hope, all of you 

Speech at the Children's Day function, New Delhi, November 14, 1980 

HEALTH, FAM!LY PLAN~NG AND SOCIAL WELFARE 

will buy later on. They are New Year's greeting cards and they also have 
been designed by children. The third task was to release two books. 

Jawaharlal Nehru was a man who had allowed his personality to grow 
in every direction. 
I believe that everyone has many persons within him. 
But either it is fault of the parents or others around us or of the social 
customs or of the educational system that many of the persons within us get 
suppressed. Some are encouraged and the others are just put to sleep with 
the result that most people do not ever grow to their full height or 
develop their total personality. 

Jawaharlal Nehru had the good fortune to face a great number of 
hardships. Nothing worthwhile in life is achieved unless you have hardships, 
unless your muscles, not just your physical muscles but the muscles of your 
intellect, of your mind, of your character, are exercised. Even a healthy 
man, if he lies down for six months, will find it very difficult to walk when 
he tries to. 

In a way, a country like India is in a fortunate position. We are 
surrounded by challenges, difficulties and hardships. . It is said th~t you 
. can look in two ways at a glass which is half filled with watei: ... Some people . 
It depends 
will say that the glass is half empty, some will say it is half full. 
on your attitude towards life. 

If you have the right attitude, all these difficulties and challenges become 
opportunities. There are opportunities which our young people, our 
children, can use to exercise those muscles about which I spoke, physically, 
mentally, morally, spiritually. If we meet the challenges and say, "Well, 
here is a challenge, but I am going to overcome it," if we have that spirit, 
then there is no difficulty that cannot be adequately met, there is no obstacle 
which cannot be removed, there is no task which cannot be accomplished. 

That is the atmosphere which Jawaharlal Nehru tried to bring in when 
he laid stress on science, when he laid stress on beauty, when he laid stress 
on education, and especially in his love for children. This is the message 
which he was trying to give. The future of any country and of our world 
It is a very 
rests on our young people. 
heavy burden. But I think yourig people are capable of shouldering it. 

It is a very big responsibility. 

We, who are much older, must help to create an atmosphere in which 
the burden on the young becomes a little lighter. Science, like anything 
else, can be good or bad. 

There is a story which is attributed to Indian mythology ab well as to 
a Roman emperor. 
·There was a man who asked his servant, "What is 
the best thing in the world?" The servant replied, "The tongue." The 
master asked, "What is the worst thing in the world?" The servant replied, 
"The tongue." Because it depends on how you use your tongue. 

It is the same with science. You can use it to make war, to destroy, 
to pollute the atmosphere, or you can use it to make a better life, to help 
people get out of poverty, to remove drudgery, to create beauty. The choice 

is in your hands. And it is not only a choice with regard to science in your 
everyday life, you have to choose what you are going to do. 

If you have the courage to choose what is right, not what is convenient 
at that moment or what other people will praise or what is easier, then you 
will find that what seemed difficult becomes easy. 
It will not matter whether 
you are praised or criticised. Then you will get the great satisfaction of 
knowing that you have done a good job. 

I do not need to say anything about the books that I have released. 
They are well known. 
I was a bit of a bookworm when I was small, partly 
owing to inclination and partly forced by my father. He did not always 
approve of the books that I wanted to read, just as perhaps your parents 
do not approve of the books you would rather read. But I n1anaged somehow 
to read books of both kinds, the ones that he wanted me to read, which I 
read openly, and some others which I had to read in a hidden way. 
I am 
sorry to say that even though I got scolded for it, I kept reading them as 

· well. 

· The book 'Glimpses of World History' was written as letters to .me. 

Befote he· wrote them, he wrote another set of letters to me whe~ he was in: . 
Allahabad and I was in Mussoorie. They were not.meant to be published. But 
many people told him, "Your daughter has enjoyed them. Why don't you 
publish them?" So, the letters were published under the title 'Letters from a 
Father to His Daughter.' They arose out of a very small question which is 
also a big question which I asked him. It was a bout the beginning of the 
world. I was quite small at that time. Later, when he was in prison, he wrote 
in continuation another set of letters which became 'Glunpses of World 
History'. Most people who have read them, in fact, all who k_now anything 
about history, find them quite remarkable. These voluminous letters were 
written when he had few reference books. There was nobody who could 
It all came out of his feeling and love and 
be asked about dates, etc. 
knowledge of history. And the letters were either smuggled out of prison. 
or I got them in a bundle when he came out. The other books that I have 
released today are an anthology of his works and 
'The Autobiography' 
which is the story of his life. About the Autobiography, Gurudev Tagore 
said something beautiful. It would not be possible for me to match his 
words. 
It would also be embarrassing for me as a daughter. Gurudev 
Tagore, when he sawJawaharlal Nehru's 'Autobiography', wrote: 

"I have just finished reading your great book and I feel intensely 
impressed and proud of your achievement. Through all details, there 
runs a deep current of humanity which overpasses a tangle of facts 
and leads ustothe person who is greater than his deeds and truer than 
his surroundings." 
I hope that specially the younger generation will read these books 

and try to be true to themselves, try to develop their own personalities. · 

Women and National Integration 

THERE rs NO task and no aspect of national life to which women do not 
make important contribution. Very often women's organizations take up 
what are called women's problems. But that 
their role and 
effectiveness. 

limits 

Development and national integration are continuing challenges. The 
social cliinate in advanced countries shows that demands and dissatisfaction 
do not decrease even after the basic needs in terms of food, clothing, shelter, 
. education and health have been met. Problems do not go away; they orily 
change their shape. . But through greater discussion and education, our 
people can appreciate what is of primacy and what is secondary. 

Very often the comparatively better off sections of society make more 
It is for won1en to impart.·· 

noise than those whose needs are more pressing, 
. a sense of values and to point this out to people: 
National integration is not a one-tiine operation. The experience 
of many other countries shows the need for constant vigilance to anticipate 
and remove any sense of grievance from the minds of any religious, linguistic 
or ethnic group. Competition in politics, economics and e1nployment has 
served to accentuate rivalries. 

I hope that women's organizations will strive to strengthen our unity. 
Immunity against the virus of communalism must be implanted in children 
at a very young age. 

Women Must Guide Society 

QUESTION : Having a woman Prime Minister, is it right for Indian women 
to expect that special emphasis should be laid on developn1ent related to 
women in areas like education and employment and in raising the status of 
women in general? 

PRIME MINISTER : This is like suggesti1:1g that if the Prime Minister is from 
a particular region or community, that area or caste or religion should get 

Message to the Tenth Congress of the National Federation of Indian Women, New 
Delhi, November 20, 1980 
Interview with Smt. Shahnaz Husain, pul:11!shed in the fortnightly magazine Femina . 
(Feb 8-22, 1981 issue) of Bombay 

greater attention. A Prime Minister must regard all citizens equally. But 
because there is still greater disparity amongst different sections of our 
society, I am deeply committed to the lessening of inequality, whether because 
of poverty or sex. We are taking special care of education for girls. Status 
cannot be raised by wishes or law. Over the years, many measures have 
been taken to helpw omen. 

Whenever a woman attains a high position, women all over the world are 
elated. There is increased awareness amongst Indian women of their rights 
and they participate more actively in various fields. Naturally, the number 
of such women is a fluctuating one. When I became Prime Minister, women 
felt a greater confidence. Not only in India but important and known 
women from different parts of the world have spoken of the rise in the status 
of women and the encouragement which the cause of women in general 
has received because of my work. 

QUESTION : Are women right in feeling th,at they should get explicit 
recognition as a special category? 

PRIME MINiSTBR : . I do not think so. 
. It is. only when. conditions i~ the . 
country as a whole improve that women can expect a better deal. Those 
who speak of such separate categories are copying the views of the affluent 
nations where the standard of living is so high that no section need remain 
under privileged. 

QUESTION : Do you feel that so far women have been treated as second··rate 
citizens? 

P&1MB MINISTER : Unfortunately, they are even now. The rules of society 
here; as in other countries, are man-made. Why else should there be any 
necessity for a women's liberation movement in the West? There, women 
have only recently been able to attain high positions. The vast majority 
of Indian women are not even aware that they have equal rights under our 
Constitution. 

QUESTION : Is it right to assume that as the country develops, the position 
of women will improve, though trends in the past contradict this assumption? 

PRIME MINISTER : It is not true to say that development has not improved 
the position of women, but the beginnings of development do throw up 
special problems and difficulties. That is a phase through which every nation 
must pass. 

QUESTION : It is said that there has been a sharp decline in the percentage 
of women workers during your last term as Prime Minister. What was 

HEALTH, FAMILY.PLANNING AND SOCIAL WELFARE 

the reason for this and has any plan been envisaged to change this state of 
things? 

PRIME MINISTER : I am not aware of such a decline. The figures compiled 
by N.S.S. show that between 1972 and 1978 the average daily employment 
of women workers in the country grew from 16 million to 18.3 million. 
A study in 1978 by the Labour Bureau on employment of women in clothing, 
chemicals and electronics industries shows that in all the three categories, 
the employment of women had increased. 
I have got complaints that some 
women workers have been thrown out of certain occupations like match-
making, coir, carpet-weaving due to advanced methods in technology; 
but steps are being taken to guard against this. 
In the dairy industry, for 
example, the National Dairy Development Board has laid down a condition 
that a minimum of 20 % of the co-operative membership should be reserved 
for women. However, we are seeing how to. safeguard against diminution 
in the empioyn1ent of women in sectors where they are likely to be displaced 

· by changes in technology'. · · 

QUESTION : Do you think that greater emphasis should be laid on family 
planning, or to health and general welfare. It is said that large amounts of 
funds meant for health and general welfare were diverted to family 
planning. 

It is the woman who beais the child and has 

PRIME }v1INISTER: Family planning is part of women's and children's health 
and general welfare. 
the 
burden of bringing it up. Frequent child-bearing affects the general health 
of the mother. · A healthy mother is more likely to have a healthy child. 
Also, if the woman is poor or from backward area, the more children she 
had, the less she can give them. 
I find that even village women want to 
limit their families and be able to give better opportunities to their children. 
Because they also want, and rightly so, to be assurecl that their two or three 
children will have a reasonable chance of surviving. 

There is need to upgrade the standard of health, nutrition and welfare 
of women. The expenditure on family planning was not at the expense of 
other health facilities. The infrastructure of health sub centres, midwives 
etc., created from the family planning budget, have been as useful for the 
general welfare of women as for family planning. Today, this supports about 
18,600 auxiliary nurse-midwives in family welfare centre with medical and 
para-medical persons attached, numbering about 5,400 in the primary 
health centres, and 524 post-partum centres attached to medical colleges 
and district hospitals for medical and child health and female sterilization. 
This programme also helps to run medical and child health services in urban 
areas an4 looks after the 
immunization and prophylaxis coverage for 
children and pregnant women. 

QUESTION : With regard to the family planning programme, it is considered 
that the Medical Termination of Pre~ancy Act of 1971 was significant, 
but existing facilities for operations are far from adequate. What do you 
feel about this and what does your government plan to do to 
improve 
facilities? 

PRIME MINISTER : Strangely enough, 
interference are the ones who expect the most from the government. 
am informed that facilities have considerably improved. 

resent government 

those who 

QUESTION : Do you personally feel that there should be equal remuneration 
for men and women for equal work? Why is it that the Equal Remuneration 
Act of 1976 has not been effective? 

PRIME MINISTER : Yes, I do. 
I was responsible for the Act of 1976. But 
when large numbers are without jobs, the axe falls on the weakest .. Employers, 
· . who did not wish to pay equal wages, coµveniently discarded women workers· 
or stopped induetfog n16re. People are quick to criticise the government, 
but I wonder how many women's organisations-or individual women have 
protested to private industry about their attitude towards women workers. 

QUESTION : Major recommendations made by the Law Commission with 
regard to women have been ignored by your government, leading many 
women activists to feel that you are insensitive to women's issues. What 
are your comments on this? 

PRIME MINISTER : It is ridiculous to say that there is insensitivity to women's 
issues. Certain problems pertaining specially to women have been or are 
being tackled by legislative measures such as prohibition of dowry,:and 
equal or non-discriminatory wages for women. We have no hesitation in 
passing legislation whenever necessary.' But my experience is that such 
legislation will remain on the statute book unless social and economic 
conditions are created to make their implementation effective. Women are 
affected by general social issues such as poverty, illiteracy and low level 
development. These we are dealing with through planning and other 
projects. 

The recommendations of the Law Commission on the Hindu Marriage 
and Special Marriage Act, rape and allied offences, as also the Married 
Women's Property Act, are under serious examination and we expect to 
come up with legislative proposals soon. 

QUESTION : What do you personally feel about women having career? Is 
it possible for a woman to perform both roles of housewife and career woman 
satisfactorily? 

PRIME MINISTER : Surely this depends on the capability and inclination of 
the woman. 
In my view, it is possible to combine the two. But one must . 
be a very well-organised person and also be able to get the cooperation 
of one's family. Also, I feel that if a marriage is to continue, the husband 
should not feel neglected. If the children are to grow into well-adjusted 
citizens, they need the mother's love and attention. But neither of these 
is incompatible with a woman's outside activities. In fact, a woman, who 
is involved in larger issues and is interested in many things, usually makes a 
better wife and mother. 

QUESTION : There has always been a stigma attached to career women. 
For instance, most Indian families disapprove of having a career won1an 
for a daughter-in-law or frown on their unmarried daughters leavin_g the 
house to earn a living. What do you feel about it? 

PRIME MINISTER : There used to be a stigrria 1:iut it is no longer there. Of 
· course, there are many expectati:ons: ·But, .on the whole; people, especially 
in the cities, are proud if _the women of the family are earning or doing 
something useful. 

QUESTION : What do you think the status of women should be within the 
family? What can be done to improve their status? 

PRIME MINISTER : Sages and statesmen have proclaimed that a country's 
progress is judged by the status of its women. An ancient Hindi sloka 
says, "Woman is the home". If the woman is not respected and accorded 
adequate status in the family, this will obviously affect the menfolk as well 
as the development of the children's character. 

QUESTION : What role can women themselves play in improving their own 
status and in solving tneir problems? 

PRIME MINISTER : Because of the physical attacks on women (these take place 
in affluent countries as much as in our own), it is essential for women to 
intellectually to be able to protect 
strengthen themselves physically and 
themselves. Women must be more active with regard to their rights and 
also other major issues before the country. Women have a . stake in 
communal harmony, stable development and peace in the world. They 
should raise their voices against communalism, violence and war. 

QUESTION : What is your message to Indian women for the future? 

PRIME MINISTER : Indian women are bridges between tradition and modernity. 
They must adapt and adopt the best wherever it is found, and be the guiding 
lights to their families and society. 

Women Engineers and Scientists 
I AM GLAD to have the opportunity of being in such a distinguished gathering 
of scientists and engineers, men and women, in a city which is known for 
its· scientific and technical research. 

I warmly greet all delegates, with a special word of welcome for those 

who have come from abroad. 

Women scientists have their own problems. · They are doing excellent 
work in laboratories and on scientific and engineering projects. A few have 
reached the highest echelons of science, as indeed of all spheres of activity. 
So, they must rid themselves of any feeling of inferiority. Determination and 
constant effort are keys to success. This is as true· cif women as of men. 

In India, we have another problem. We spend enormous amounts on 

training young scientists. · · Much work awaits them. Yet, the opportunities . 
of professional advancement and material improvement offered by affluent 
countries tempt them to migrate. We 
lose people whom we have 
educated at high cost. They, the advanced countries, get well-trained people 
at little expense. 

A United Nations survey has computed the cost of this brain drain, 
designating it as technological assistance given by-the poor to the rich-the 
sum is considerable. 

Your agenda deals with problems which are of importance to our plan 
for development-in India as well as to a large part of the globe, some of 
vital concern to women. These you will discuss. I should like to draw your 
attention to the wider perspective in which tp.ese questions should be viewed. 
Since we are parts of the whole, we are concerned with general problems. 
Science is in, a peculiar predicament today. It enjoys tremendous prestige, 
yet evokes unprecedented disquiet. There is galloping growth of science 
and of scientists-each pursuing her or his special line of investigation or 
activity. Every now and then we hear of some spectacular discovery. 

Personally, I never cease to marvel and feel elated and proud at each 
new scientific development wherever it takes place. I am equally astonished 
that so many, and the younger generation, take these wonders for granted 
and feel bored! 
In some regions of the world, people are too engrossed 
in the struggle for survival, and in others, over-abundance and over-
indulgence have eroded their spiritual, moral and aesthetic springs. This 
is what led Martin Luther King to say : "Our scientific power has outrun 
our spiritual power. We have guided missiles and misguided men." 

Inaugural address at the Sixth International Conference of Women Engineers and 
Scientists, Bombay, September 8, 1981 

Hl!ALTH, FAMILY PLANNING AND SOCIAL WELFARE 

the search for 

The driving power of scientists is 

truth, and the 
application of knowledge for the benefit of the society in which they live. 
Science and technology have brought about levels of comfort and prosperity 
undreamt of in earlier years even by the most affluent. We, in the developing 
countries, look to science not for luxury but to solve age-old problems of 
. privation and to bring about greater social and economic justice and equality 
of opportunity. 

vVe need science for our immediate imperative of development-to 
improve efficiency, to produce more, to save time and labour, to reduce 
drudgery and wear and tear at all levels. And the best use of science is not 
only for the big, spectacular advances but equally in small improvements 
and adaptations, visible to and of immense immediate help in everyday life, 
especially to the weaker sections of society. We want science in the humblest 
tribal huts, in our fields as well as in the most sophisticated industrial and 
nuclear power plants. We need it to become self-reliant individuals, living 
in self-reliant natio11s. 
Science has not let· us down. · But our own experience and that of 
others sometimes fills us with dismay to see how often science and technology 
have been used unscientifically for profit or for some real or imagined success, 
ignoring the long-term chain reaction. 

There was a time when scientists themselves were so confident, even 
ecstatic, about their discoveries and the vast potential of knowledge and 
achievement which they opened out, that they gave no thought to the likely 
outcome. Perhaps they could not imagine that various authorities would 
be so short-sighted or it may be that the excitement of possible discoveries 
was too absorbing to look beyond. Scientists believed that they had, or 
would soon have, all the answers. Our own faith in their ability to solve 
all problems was boundless. 

Actually, science has raised as many new problems as it has solved . 
.. Much of early mining, major irrigation and industrialization had a certain 
reckless adventurism about them. They have led to exhaustion, pollution 
and deforestation which are hardly different from the same problems caused 
by poverty. The world is gradually becoming aware of these harmful 
effects which are terribly difficult, very costly and take time to rectify. The 
affluent countries are in a better position to combat them. As Thomas 
Hobbes pointed out a long time ago, science is indeed the knowledge of 
consequences. 
If science has conferred unprecedented levels of prosperity 
on some nations, has it not also led mankind as a whole nearer to total 
annihilation? 

The present task of Indian scientists is to relate new knowledge to old 
experience. In the initial enthusiasm for modernity, there was a tendency 
to reject all that was old as irrelevant or superstitiou~. Time is revealing 
grains of sense even in what are regarded as old wives' tales. Old plants 
and ·herbs are our friends once more. We find some commonsense in 

traditional n1aterials for building and in time-worn practices of farming. 
Until recently our farmers were ridiculed for scratching the earth. · Today 
we are told that deep-ploughing tractors can harm the soil. I am glad that 
your own programme of discussions touches on some of these points. 

recognize 

Even the advanced 

the miracle and equilibrium of 
photosynthesis and other natural processes. Fortunes have to be spent in 
laboratories to synthesise even minute quantities of some rare enzymes 
and chemicals that living bodies produce with such natural ease. However, 
our deep interest in appropriate technology does not indicate the giving up 
of basic science which is fundamental to our goal of self-reliance. The two 
streams n1ust flow together, interacting and perhaps influencing each 
other. 

In the last thre.e or four centuries, scientific discoveries have had impact 
on political ideas and social organization. The great debate· over the use 
of nuclear energy and the current heart-searching caused by dilemmas. of 
. genetic. engineering show the moral concern of scientists. 

Along with other citizens,· scientists are becoming more . a ware of the. 
rn.ajor problems that scier1ce poses ror the human race .. No 
longer is it 
claimed that science is value-neutral. The blame for misuse lies on all of· 
us. We should accept it and try to do s01nething about it. Ultimately, 
the hmnan mind is the master, and it must decide how to use the tools at 
its disposal. 

.But the choices before us are conflicting: 

( a) The exploitation of 80 % of the earth's scarce resources by a m,"re 
20 % of its population; tensions. leading to war and destruction, 
which might envelop all. 

(b) The means of creating conditions for the eradication of poverty 
and disease and bringing harmony amongst different peoples. 

Obviously, we must make every effort for the second choice. 
National loyalties do not clash with international priorities. To a 
lesser or greater extent, each country and each individual is dependant on 
others. The fact of this interdependence, founded on independence, is 
being increasingly accepted. 

Let us hope that the common danger which confronts the human 
species will compel all women and 1nen, especially young people and 
scientists of all ages, those working in billion-dollar laboratories or in 
shoe-string outfits, to raise their voices in defence of sanity. Science should 
stand for truth that serves goodness and beauty, a continuous journey into 
past, present and future, neglecting no aspect of previous or prevalent thought 
or what the future might bring. 

As Maurice Maeterlinck said: "It is not enough to possess a truth; it 

is essential that the truth should possess us." 

I entirely agree with the previous speaker who· urged rational and 
scientific thinking and spreading of what we call the scientific temper. 
But keep in mind that new superstitions are constantly coming up. Let 
us revive the spirit of wonder and hope that urges ordinary people to feel 
involved, to do ordinary things extraordinarily well or to do extraordinary 
things. Let science be used to know not only the world and outer space 
but ourselves, to bring to all sections of the people a fmer quality of life, 
i.e., a higher level of development and evolution, not merely material but 
intellectual and spiritual. 
wishes. 

I have pleasure in inaugurating the Conference and give it my good 

Women and Enterprise 
A NATION'S . 'WEALTH conies through work and production .. But it can 
contribute to justice and harmony in society· only if there 
is equitable 
distribution of it-distribution of wealth and of production and along with 
it, of course, distribution of the responsibility and the effort. 
I think that 
those who are gathered here are women who have experience of making 
an effort and in sharing the burden of the development of their countries. 
Enterprise converts potential into actuality. This means the individual's 
enterprise, the ·group's enterprise, and the nation's enterprise. The poet 
Hafiz said: "On the neck of the young man no gem sparkles as graciously 
as enterprise". Perhaps, we can say this for our young women as well. 

Old theories are being constantly disproved, It was once believed that 
some societies are better endowed than others with enterprise, or that strong 
family ties are a hindrance, and that women were inferior and could not do 
justice to various types of tasks or activities. Those present here are proof 
that this is not so. 

I am very happy to see greater interest of and participation of women 
I would like to say 
in all spheres of activity, especially entrepreneurship. 
that I am not a feminist, because I believe that most of today's problems 
in the world, and especially the problems in developing societies, affect n1en 
and women. But we have to speak up for women because they have been 
suppressed. They have not been allowed to develop, to contribute in various 
spheres, in a world where they form half of the population. How can there 
be progress and development if that half is neglected and is not playing its 

Inaugural address at the l!iternational Conference of Women Entrepreneurs, New Delhi. 
November 27. 1981 

·"f.·. 

full part, a:nd its talents and abilities are not fully utilized to national and 
international purposes? That is why we speak up for women. We don't 
want to be regarded as separate species. We are human beings. All we 
say is: treat us as normal human beings. 

Although women have come up in many spheres, it is true that society 
remains or rather clings to its man-made rules. Customs, habits, even 
language, show the male point of view. Nowadays, much literature is 
appearing on this subject and a study is being made. There is no doubt 
that a woman faces far greater resistance in coming up or in tackling any 
job than a man would. 
It is to their credit that they have been able to over-
come this resistance. 
In India, as well as in developing countries as a whole, 
this has been achieved by and large with harmony and without any 
confrontation. 

Women do have to work much harder and longer. 1"1:any roles are 
expected of them-responsibility for running their homes in addition to 
whatever they do professionally. We read in Madame Curie's life how much 
time she had to spend in the · kitchen instead of iri her laboratory for 
· fear that her French m6ther-in~law would say that.· Polish girls could not 
.cook. 

A situation, where there is a general 

increase in opportunities of 
employment and advancement,. will automatically increase opportunities also 
for women. However, we must ensure that our laws and our practice do 
not discriminate against won1en. 

There is a movement now for equal rights in many countries. 

In India, 
we can say that women do have equal rights in law but, in actual practice, 
private employers tend to pay less to women, although very often they do 
jobs of greater drudgery. 
If equal pay is demanded, then employment 
itself is stopped. But, generally speaking, we can say that we have lessened 
discrimination against won1en in India. Of course, we do not yet allow 
them in the Defence Forces. 

In traditional occupations-farming, dairying, retail trade-women 
In :fisheries, there is a division of labour-men 

have always been prominent. 
go out to sea, women take care of the marketing. 

It is more in the so-called cultured classes that the notion grew up that 
women should not work. The economic pressures of urban life have changed 
much of this. 
In many places ageing parents find daughters to be more 
reliable supporters than sons. But the trouble in our country is that young 
people want jobs rather than opportunities for work. 

A general observation can be made that in developing countries, where the 
State is compelled to take upon itself direct responsibilities for economic 
management, the young feel that work has to be found for them and it is 
not for them to take hold of the opportunities and to find work. There is 
no lack of work and no lack of opportunities if only people were willing to 
take some risks and to grasp the nettle, so to speak. 

However, we are trying to create large opportunities for self-employment 
through the encouragement of the decentralized sector; auxiliary agricultural 
vocations, crafts, rural industries, etc. Through banks and credit agencies 
we also provide investment advances and technical and managerial guidance. 
I am told that in societies with developed social security, young people 
are showing increasing reluctance to work because of the guarantee of State 
support when they are out of work. So, we see that prosperity breeds its 
own social problems, and it tends to soften the ethical fibre. That is why 
it is important not to weaken the link between work, wealth and happiness, 
if I can use the title of a book by H.G.Wells. 

But no one system can work for all countries. Each country has to 
the best of the past and combines it with 

ftnd it5 own path which uses 
present needs, as well as with its vision of its future. 

In my view, neither capitalism nor Marxism has worked. Countries 
which swear by market forces are not really that laissez faire. Without the 
· backing of social security, these free enterprise societies would not work. 
Also, the c.ontribution to the national product froin the State sector is greater 
Ill the United . States, for example, than in India~ On the other hand, 
societies, which have tried to completely shut off private initiative, have 
found that it is not conducive to social strength or contentment or to the 
desire to work. So, these ideological debates often obscure the realities of 
the situation. 

In India, we have adopted what we call a mixed economy. There is no 
ideological confusion in this. There are known roles for the State sector 
and the private sector. We are trying a combination of State and individual 
enterprise. The Indian objective has been to bring about a more harmonious 
·relationship between the individual and society. Indeed, that is the basic 
principle of democracy and of democratic planning. 

Those, who derided the Indian experiment as slow and soft,=now frnd 
that, after all, .the fast have not grown so rapidly. We are also often advised 
to pursue consumer-oriented or export-oriented growth. This can work 
in small countries, but in a countryof India's size we simply cannot afford 
to give up our objective of self-reliance. We do want to export and we 
intend to strengthen our export efforts. But growth cannot be 
totally 
export-oriented or dependant on consumer trends of other countries. That 
would impinge on our true economic independence. 

We want greater economic independence, but we do not underrate the 
importance of international economic and technological co-operation. In 
fact, greater stability and progress in the world need more independence of 
countries in themselves as well as interdependence among countries. 

I hope the in-depth discussions and exchange of experiences of work 
in different countries to be held during this conference will help our countries 
. to fashion better societies which give opportunities to men· and women to 
develop to the full the capacity that is within them. Nobody can give extra 

capacity. But we, in India, feel that each individual is endowed with enormous 
inner strength and resources. The question is how to develop 
them, 
how to bring them out and how to use them for larger purposes. 

I hope that this conference will come up with constructive ideas which 

we, in India, can pursue to solve our special difficulties and those encoun-
tered by women as also the general problem of enlarging opportunities of 
self-employment. 

Women, Education and Peace 
You HAVE CHOS.EN a.fascinating subject. It is of tremendous importance 

and one in which I have long been deeply int.erested, Also, I am relieved 
· that fot once someone is talking of responsibilities and not merely iilsisting 

on rights. 

Of course, the theme applies equally to men. 

\Vomen and men are 
both parts of the hum.an species and share its characteristics. Neither 
the work nor the weeping is confined to one or the other; nor are the attributes 
of aggressiveness or gentleness. The division is between those who are 
sensitive and aware and those whose perceptions are clouded by prejudice 
or the thought of some immediate advantage or circumscribed by 
the 
prevailing mood of their surroundings. 
l\1en and women arc found in both 
groups. Yet, I shall not quarrel with your focus on women in this conference. 
The responsibility to work for peace lies on all citizens, all - sections and 
communities, whatever their similarities or their differences. The campaign 
for peace must be waged in all such groupings, but fir!t the individual should 
be convinced. 

The words of the' UNESCO Charter with which you are all familiar-

that as war- begins in the minds of men, the defences of peace must be built 
there-has been so often repeated that its power has become somewhat 
blunt but not its relevance and validity. 

Weapons do not distinguish between the good and the bad. No 
matter how limited and trivial the beginning, there is every possibility of 
us all being engulfed should there be a conflict. The concept of balance 
of terror is still propagated. Some think that war can be prevented through 
fear of the non-preventible reprisals that first strike can bring about. Such 
brinkmanship overlooks the fact that one slip of the foot is enough to hurl 
us into the abyss. 

Speech at a meeting nf expcns on tlw Role of Women in the Education u!" Young 
People for Peace, Mutual Understanding and Respect for Human Rights,- New Delh[. 
December 7, 198[' 

Why are wars fought? 

In eadier days for sources of food, for larger 
kingdoms, for what was considered honour and the glory of victory. 
Countries were colonised for their riches and natural resources. 

All major religions have been experiments 

in brotherhood. But 
ironically religion has also divided humanity and there have been wars in 
the name of religion. 

But men and women have also fought for freedom or for an ideal or 
an intangible idea which becomes a driving force. Today, the confrontation 
is sometimes said to be based on ideology. But a second look proves the 
hollowness of this theory. The conflict is more over what are considered 
to be national interests. 
It is for power and influence and the desire to 
control peoples and natural resources. There is now no need to struggle 
for resources in the same way. If there is the political will, it is possible to 
come to sot11e agreement about distribution and ·other connected matters 
. which will cause hurt to no one. Yet the atmosphere remains one of conflict. 
The basic cause ofconflict·is some kind of fear and insecurity. 
Insecurity 
d{ives one to the need to impress, which in ti.1rn breeds aggi;essive or S(.;lf-. 
righteous tendencies. · A person, who is well adjusted and at· peace with 
hiinself or herself, will be more tolerant towards others. So, the question 
has to be dealt with at the personal level as well as at social, national and 
international levels. · 

In the child's development, the most crucial influence is that of parents 
and teachers. 
It is no easy task, but nonetheless essential to help the 
child to develop his own personality in his own way and at his own pace. 
From the earliest age he is an individual and his individuality is entitled to 
recognition. So is his growing mind. No one is perfect. If we can 
tolerate our own faults, why make the child suffer for his? If the child 
does not feel threatened in any wa:y,· if he fe~ls totally secure in the parents' 
and teachers' affection for him as=he is, he is more likely to correct those 
faults which can be corrected. Words are not as important as behaviour 
and' example. If parents and teachers are calm and sure, the child also will 
feel more secure and will be able to accept guidance and to develop his 
own capacity. 

Natural aggressiveness can be directed into many useful channels. 
Everyone now realizes how important the human and natural environment 
is to the child. But this is largely dependant on two aspects-his capacity 
to observe and absorb, and to relate to it. Also like any adult, the child 
needs to be able to pause to find himself and to know himself. 

Hand in hand with observation comes the spirit of enquiry which must 
In one of the papers circulated for this 
be encouraged with honest answers. 
conference, I saw a phrase which I fully support: "Openness and friendliness 
towards other persons are n1ore readily promoted when each child can be 
sure about his or her identity and be proud of it." Of course, this is equally 
true where societies and countries are concerned. 

From the earliest stages, it is important to inculcate an attitude of 
understanding towards others, especially those who are different in race or 
colour or may have different religions or customs. There should be 
acceptance of and concern for those who are handicapped or disabled or 
weak in any way. Care for animals and plants is part of the same outlook 
on life. 

Widening knowledge and the ability to act purposefully must be 
accompanied by breadth of vision and thought and a deepening of sensitivity 
to beauty and also to the pain and hurt, especially for others. Social and 
economic injustice and the disparities which continue in countries and 
between countries are also causes of discontent and conflict. 

Mahatma Gandhi, who made non-violence a moral alternative to 
armed conflict, used to say that the story of mankind is, or should be, 
the story of gradual transformation of violence into a sense of love and 
brotherhood. And when he spoke of non-violence, he did not mean merely 
· the non-use of weapons or the avoidance of physical harm, but even 
non-violence in·wcirds and in one's thoughts. Non-violenc\') to him.meant 
the absence of bitterness and hatred. 

Contemporary society seems to take violence-even when it is quite 
pointless and senseless-for granted. 
Its steady increase in towns and 
villages in almost all countries is a cause for grave concern. Crimes against 
women have also grown. Parents' and teachers' groups along with other 
concerned citizens and public and governmental bodies must get together 
to fight this evil. What are the causes ~of this mentality of frustration and 
callousness? Society itself and individuals must find the answer. 

Internationally, in fact, between individuals also, it is true that the 
first step towards peace is to agree to coexist. 
Individuals and nations 
have the right to pur~ue their own religion, ideology or path; one person's 
right can operate only so long as it does not conflict with the right of others. 
Hence the need for self-restraint on the part of individuals as well as nations. 
Coexistence also means that no individual or nation should impose its own 
views on others, implying non-interference with the internal affairs of others. 
Rights and duties are thus enmeshed. 
followed, 
nationalism can be cured of the aggressive and expansionist tendencies that 
so often characterise it. Nation-states cannot be wished away. But 
technological development has already underlined the interdependence of 
the world. Let it determine to solve disputes through negotiations rather 
than confrontation. When educators inculcate the concept of duty to one's 
motherland, they must lay even greater emphasis on duty to our Mother 
Earth. 

If this principle 

is 

Every person has many roles-parent and teacher, but above all, a 
citizen with responsibility towards one's country and the world. Education 
for peace must spread in schools and colleges but not be confined within 
It must find a place 
their walls. 

It must pervade the all-pervasive media. 

HEALTH, FAMILY PLA."NNING AND SOCIAL WELFARE 

in all conferences .and meetings, for without peace, how will any peaceful 
activity survive and who can better preach this message than women and 
young people. Knowledge, science, technology, have crossed frontiers 
of land and sea and beyond the earth's orbit. Can humankind remain 
imprisoned in the old concepts, old superstitions, old prejudices and allow 
its humaneness to shrink? Barriers of all kinds must be broken. The world 
must now be looked at as one whole and in its totality and problems viewed 
in the global context. Humanity must be allowed to grow to its full stature. 

International 
· .Affairs 

Industrializing the Developing Countries 

ONLY A FEW days ago, the Indian people took part in a stupendous process 
of political action through what were the biggest elections in the world. 
It was an act of faith, this spectacle of millions and millions all over the 
country, with sound commonsense and keen awareness of their own 
particular problems, as well as of the wider national and international 
scene, asserting their right to install a government of their choice. 
It was 
a reaffirmation of their abiding belief in our political ideals and our unshake-
able resolve to achieve economic and social justice as rapidly as possible. 
Political freedom and socio-economic emancipation go hand in hand, each 
reinforcing the other. 

You have come to India when a new Government has just taken over 
and has yet to .get on its feet ... We are distressed to fi.nd that tb,e sound ·and 
stable economy which we had · left only three years ago and which we. had· 
built with such hard labour and the co-operation and sacrifices of our 
people, is in a shambles. Outside our borders, a situation has developed 
which threatens our security and is a cause for concern in the entire region. 
That is why for us the Third General Conference of UNIDO has special 
significance. The tasks which lie ahead of this conference are precisely the 
furthering of those objectives which we have demonstrated to be close 
to our hearts: the removal of the barriers to progress in order that man may 
achieve a brighter future. 

longer commands acceptance. 

_ You are meeting at a crucial period in the world's economic evolution: 
The inherent inequities and weaknesses of the present economic order are 
felt more deeply and resented more strongly than ever before. The existing 
system, with the world divided between the industrialized haves and the 
developing have-riots, no 
Industrial 
production cannot now be sustained on the basis of domination over raw 
material sources, preservation of captive markets, or the exploitation of 
unresisting labour. For centuries, the colonial concept of comparative 
advantage was pursued with great vigour to preclude the industrial output 
It is ironical that the same concept, in a new 
of the developing countries. 
and dynamic situation, is being ignored. The industrialization of 
the 
developing world is an inevitable process of history. To keep it peaceful 
requires the redeployment of industrial capacity from the developed to 
It is a challenge to our collective wisdom to ensure 
developing countries. 
that this takes place in a global environment of harmony and co-
operation. 

Address at the Third UNlDO Conference, New Delhi, January 21, 1980 

When we speak of accelerating industrialization in developing countries, 
it is not our intention to imitate Western standards, or seek shortcuts to 
a consumers' paradise. We must guard against the luxury-oriented approach, 
with its rising .;piral of advertising and salesmanship, and a wastage of national 
resources for the repetitive production of goods catering to the affluent. 
Nor should we try to adopt forms of industrial organization which are 
entirely alien to the natural genius of the people. The development and 
absorption of technology must be in tune with the economic ethos of the 
society. Hence, the special relevance of productive sharing of technologies 
amongst developing countries. 

Industry has to bridge the gulf between the rich and the poor, between 
the city and the village, between the traditional and the new 
technology. 
It has to provide adequate linkage to other sectors of the economy: to 
agricujture which is the major vocation of the people, to irrigation and rural 
development, to health and family welfare, and Jlnally, to the programme 
ofbasic minimum needs, essential for the eradication of unemployment and 
rm:al poverty.· Above all, it must ensure that the ecological balance is not· . 
disturbed .. The process of i1idustrial growth must not sacrifice our fi1ture. 
or the immediate need for a harmonious habitat ·for all living beings. 

Industrialization, then, has to be viewed not just as a question of 
installing a few factories here or there, or tinkering "ivith the modalities of 
production to increase commodity flows. · It has also to be seen as an ethos 
in itself, a way of thinking and action, embedded in a process which takes 
society as a whole towards commonly accepted objectives. There are some 
who argue about the primacy of agriculture over industry, or the relative 
merits of different scales of industrial techniques. These arguments are 
hardly relevant. Each sector has its own importance and its own part in 
changing and strengthening the social fabric. Mutual reinforcement rather 
than mutual exclusion is called for. 

A review of past trends of industrialization in developing countries 
makei°dismal reading against the background of the projections worked out 
at UNIDO IL There has hardly been a 1 % increase in the share of world 
manufacturing activity by the developing countries against the 5 %-6 % 
increase envisaged. This is a sad reflection on international co-operation 
and shows that, despite definite commitments made in various forums, 
most developed countries have yet to translate precept into practice. 
If 
the share of the developing countries has to exceed 13 % by the year 2000. 
which is all they will get if the past trends of growth continue, the process 
must be accelerated. What is urgently needed is a reaffirmation by the world 
community that the New International Economic Order will not remain a 
distant illusion but that, through a more determined political will on the part 
of industrialized countries, pragmatic measures will be taken to attain the 
Lima Target within a well-defined time-frame. · 

In the discussion on the global dimensions of economic co-operation 

them import credit. Developing 

to facilitate increased financial and technological flows, you will have to 
consider the creation of new mechanisms where at present there are clearly 
established vacuums. The question is not just of generating purchasing 
ability in the developing countries by improving their balance of payments 
position or offering 
countries must 
themselves produce industrial goods to meet the increasing demands of their 
people. The continuing monetary instability in the world is 
in a large 
measure due to the destabilizing existence ofuninvested surplus funds. These· 
must be put to productive use. The proposal of a North-South Global 
Fund, endorsed recently by the Group of 77 at Havana, seems to merit 
It incorporates the principles which a new 
sympathetic consideration. 
financial arrangement should consider-such as, contributions from financial 
markets which have surplus· liquidity, 
the channelling of funds through 
national financial institutions, credit on soft 
terms of interest, and 
effective control of the mechanisms by those in whose interest the fund is to 
be established. 

Since oui· iildependence i'n 1947, we have made a co11scious attempt 
to follow a development strategy designed to lessen disparity and to take 
us towards self-reliance. 
In so doing, we have increased our capacity for 
co-operation with other developing countries. As regards our installed 
capacity, we are among the first ten of the most industrialized countries in 
the world, and among the first three in terms of manpower, expertise and 
capabilities. vVe feel it our duty and privilege to share with others the 
knowledge which we have gathered and the experience which we have 
accumulated in the process of development and to allow others to avail 
of our institutions and capacities. We hope that this conference will share 
our enthusiasm and our optimism for 
future avenues of international 
co-operation. 

We, in the developing countries, are understandably obsessed with 
the prob1em of economic backwardness and its attendant ills. Yet, this 
cannot and does not overshadow our nationalism. The vivid memories 
of the years and experiences of colonialism sharpen our sensitivity, and our 
aversion to any attempt by other countries to influence our policy or impose 
their views on us. Our policies must be formulated in the light of our history, 
our culture and our vision of our future. 
If we seek help, it is not a charity 
but rather as part of a process to undo the injustice of ages and bring greater 
equality and security, thereby creating conditions for stable and enduring 
peace in the world, which all countries earnestly seek. 

This is a crucial meeting, a necessary coming-together of all nations 
to try to evolve practical measures to further industrialization and increase 
the world's material progress. Let us remember that material progress is 
only one dimension of our lives and we can utilize and enjoy it fully only 
if we develop in other directions iilso. 

India and Austria 

THIS IS THE :first visit of the Head of the Government of Austria to India. 
I have pleasure in welcoming you on my own behalf, on behalf of my 
Government and the people of India. But you are not a stranger to India. 
Your acquaintance and friendship with my father dates back to the 
Conference Against Imperialism in Brussels in 1927. 

The elegance and warm spontaneity of the Austrian spirit is reflected 
in your fine arts. Vienna has inspired some of the most beautiful poetry 
and music and charms all who get to know this enchanting city. Apart 
from this aesthetic response, there is appreciation of the creative temperame11t 
evident in the original work of your countrymen in psychology, medicine, . 
. gt;netics and philosophy and respect for your technological advance. Today, 
Vienna houses the headquarters of important international organizations,. 
including the UNIDO which has brought you here.. The value or Austria ·· · 
to the world community goes far beyond its size. 

Located as it is in Central Europe, and with its sad experience of Nazi 
domination followed by the conflicts of the post-war era, it was natural 
for Austria to assume the position of an alert and positive neutrality. Our 
own circumstances were and remain very different; hence our commitment 
to non-alignment which means not aloofness or blindly following any i)ower 
or bloc but assessing each issue on its merits. 

Europe was the battlefield of tV(o world wars. The fear of a third far 
more destructive war led to truce, albeit a smnewhat uneasy one. But 
even that deiente is now being abandoned, for the theatre of conflict is no 
longer in Europe but in Asia. 
\Ve feel the reverberations and hear the 
clash of rival powers around us. Nations are being asked to stand up and 
be counted, as if partisanship were the test of rectitude. Not by s'uch 
simple drawing of lines can right and wrong be judged, nor peace and stability 
restored to troubled regions. Human beings should not be seen as 
geostrategic zones on maps. They deserve to be treated as people struggling 
against the inequalities of centuries, struggling for justice and equality. 

We admire your efforts to preserve Austria in tranquil prosperity. 
Because we appreciate your concern for certain values, we expect greater 
understanding of our own aspirations and fears. We have experienced 
colonialism. We see once again the interference of powerful elements. · We 
may be> a long way from riches, but India is not amenable to manipulation. 
We mu~t strive for stability in our region by the only feasible approach, 

Speech at dinner in honour of the Federal Chancellor of the Republic of Austria .. Dr Bruno 
Kreisky, New Delhi, January 31, 1980 

by attempting to lessen tensions. The intrusions of others in this process, 
however well-meant, will be futile if not malignant. We resist them. 

All these years we have endeavoured to create an atmosphere of trust 
and to improve mutual relationships .. Our policy is independent and dynamic 
aimed at peace and active co-operation with all countries, including in 
particular our neighbours. 

Mr. Chancellor, we hold you in esteem for your zeal to redress the 
inequalities of the global economy and the imbalance of the present world 
economic system. Austria has endeared itself to us by giving of its expertise 
and technology. More can be done to further our co-operation. We 
look forward to continuing our bilateral consultations and to enlarging 
our co-operation to mutual benefit. 

Pool Resources to Fight Hunger 
F ooo IS THE very foundation of life. Today, with the help of industrial 
technology, we produce a myriad things, but food production must remain 
our first concern. This concern has been summed up in the evolution, 
through the good offices of F.A.0., of the concept of the International Food 
Security System. 

The realization that man .was born free but was everywhere in chains 
led to the great revol~tionary movements of the 18th, 19th and 20th centuries. 
The realization that while science has given us the power to feed all mankind, 
800 million still live in hunger must spur us on to new 
international 
It is unfortunate that the recommendations 
arrangements to eliminate want. 
of the World Food Conference ot' 1974 have made little headway. The 
developed and the developing seem to see the universe differently. 

It is in this context that to.qay's conference assumes significance. 

welcome all the Ministers and other participants attending this conference 
on behalf of the people in India who stand to benefit from your deliberations. 
Mr Director-General, I am glad to see you in our midst. You have been 
a friend of this country and of this region from the days when you represented 
F.A.0. in New Delhi. 

My colleague, the Agriculture Minister, has given a detailed account 
of the progress India has made in increasing food production and of the 
many unfinished tasks that still call for attention. 
I shall address 1nyself 
to some major issues of common concern to all of us-the need to · 

fnaugura.1 address·at the Fifteenth Regional Conference of F.A.O. for Asia and Pacific, 
New Delhi, March 10, 1980 

i t i 
l l L • t 

stimulate economic growth without damage to ecological harmony and the 
importance of employment generation and energy management 

The countries represented here contain more than half the world's 
population. The greatest incidence of poverty also occurs in our region. 
Our peoples are poor but many of our lands were well known in the past 
for their wealth. They can be rich once again because of their endowments 
of soil, water, minerals, abundant year-round sunshine and, above all, the 
skill and drive of their people. 
In the past, some of these resources were 
exploited for the benefit of others. Even after our liberation we have been 
squandering our assets. For example, most of the unique tropical rain 
forests of the region have been fast dwindling. While soil erosion catches 
attention, because it is visible to the eye, the erosion of valuable genetic 
material in the form of plants and animals goes unnoticed. 

Since the early fifties, the production of more food and the diversification 
of rural employment have formed .the core of all our development plans. 
· We have constructed dams and canals. Farmers have begun 1.}Sing pumps 
· · in huge numbers'. . Our. extension agencies. have popularised .new farming · . 

practices. We have imported and distributed fertilizers · ai1d are now 
producing them in substantial quantities .. We· have built comprehensive 
credit and marketing systems. Land laws have given ownership rights to 
millions. Our scientists have evolved new plant varieties suitable for our 
soil and climatic variations. The combined result of all this is that our food 
production has gone up 2t times. No longer is the taunt flung at us 
that an agricultural country has to seek food from outside. 

But the battle is far from won. Hunger is far from vanquished. Many 
old problems persist. New ones have arisen from the very development 
that has taken place. The desire to profit out of poverty seems to be strong 
amongst the affluent nations and also among affluent sections of our own 
population. How else can we explain the enormous rise in the pri~e of 
essential inputs like fertilizers during the last one year? Can the small 
farmer, who is too poor to buy inputs'and too weak to take risks, afford 
these costs? 
I urge F.A.O. to initiate a move for an international agreement 
on the limitation of the prices of strategic agricultural inputs so that they are 
not beyond the reach of the average farmer. 

We have enlarged our rural credit system, but we have not been able 
to assist every farmer irrespective of the size of his holding. Those in charge 
of agricultural development programmes must find new ways of improving 
the economic well-being of the rural poor. In India, we have been 
experimenting in a small way with crop and cattle insurance but we have 
not yet been able to develop mechanisms to protect farmers adequately from 
losses due to causes beyond their control. 

What a farmer needs most is the assurance of remunerative marketing.· 
As more and more small farmers grow saleable products, they find that 
they are unable to get a reasonable return for their labour and investment. 

-.·r·. 

Small increases in output frequently cause large drops in price. Conversely, 
small shortfalls in production lead to panic purchases by the well-to-do and 
thereby disproportionately increase consumer price. Agricultural growth 
has . to be coupled with stability of production, producer-oriented 
procurement, and consumer-oriented marketing. 

Besides strengthening public agencies for procurement, we are also 
promoting the organization of producers' and consumers' co-operatives. 
Our dairy sector has made dramatic progress largely because millions who -
own just a couple of cows or buffaloes have been brought into a chain of 
dairy co-operatives. If simiiar organizations of small fishermen are promoted, 
coastal communities can prosper. They can undertake the cultivation 
of prawns, oysters, mussels, eels, etc., and also plant trees like casuarina, 
cashewnut and coconut along the sea coast. Such coastal shelter belts 
of economically useful plants would also help to minimize sea erosion and 
cyclone damage. 

· . Although India has achieved comparative self-sufficiency in food, 
malnutrition is Still prevalent· not because· of lack of food· in the market· 
but becausethere is no money in the pockets ofmany people (and sometimes 
no pockets· even!) to buy it. Hence our nutrition problem is basically a 
problem of providing employment. The share of agriculture in the work 
force is not likely to diminish during the eighties in spite of the impressive 
growth of our industrial and infrastructure sectors. Out of a net addition 
to the labour force of about 6.7 million per year, as inany as 5.3 million 
will have to be absorbed in the agricultural and unorganized rural sectors. 
Solutions thatuits one country do not necessarily suit another. The 
advanced countries have mechanized their farming. But India and many 
other Asian countries need employment-creating rather than labour-saving 
technology. This should be one of the aims of research. "\V~ must remember 
Mahatma Gandhi's warning that machinery should not ""help a few to 
ride on-the backs of the mill~ons." 

There is an old saying 'paddy and poverty go together'. 

I hope you 
will identify methods to sever this link and help rice farmers to improve 
their income through subsidiary occupations. They can be taught to 
process every part of the rice plant into value-added material. Fortified rice 
straw can support a subsidiary occupation like animal husbandry. Rice 
bran oil can be another source of income and de-oiled bran can be used as 
poultry feed. The introduction of an additional crop after rice like pulses, 
oilseeds or jute would add to income and employment. 
The crucial question is that of energy management. 

Industry and 
agriculture both consume vast amounts of energy for increased production, 
while oil or even coal are becoming more costly and less easily available. 
The solution prescribed by some experts is to limit growth. 
Ironically, 
those who practise conspicuous consumption are teaching the virtues of 
thrift to us,-the poor. Most countries represented here cannot obviously 

think of a limit to economic growth just now. They are still struggling to 
provide the basic minimum needs of their people. Agriculture, fortunately, 
is a profession based on renewable forms of energy. Most crops are 
primarily a harvest of solar power. The so-called modern farm technology 
has led to a growing dependence on chemicals based on fossil fuels. There 
need be no limit to growth in agriculture provided we adopt techniques of 
organic recycling. 

Recycling is hnportant for energy-deficient countries like ours. 1"1ore 
recycling in affluent countries would be good for them and the world. 
It has 
been estimated that in the United States of America about 300 million trees 
can be saved each year if the quantity of waste paper recycled is trebled. 
Until a few years ago our farmers were suspicious of anything unfamiliar. 
But now that quick benefits have been proved, they take eagerly to the new. 
In 1966, when I first became Prime Minister, we initiated a high-yielding 
variety .programme in wheat, and we had hardly 40 hectares of land under 
it. By 1971, the area·under the new varieties had· gone up to 4 million 
hectares! . \Vheat produc:tion doulJled within. six years. Obviously, such 
a quantum jump in wheat production could be achieved only whei1 
official programme rapidly grew into a farmers' movement. 

the . 

Let us, therefore, convert the difficulties caused by the rising cost of 
petroleum products into an opportunity to expand a movement for energy 
conservation and recycling. No such event is an unmixed blessing or curse. 
It all depends upon how we take up challenges. Countries in this region 
should take full advantage of a beneficial fall-out from the increase in the 
price of petroleum products, namely, a spurt in demand for natural rubber, 
jute, cotton and other fibres. 

Even among developing countries, some are blessed with n1ou11ting 
riches from exports of oii. Others have met with a degree of success on the 
food front. 
In order to roll back the tidi of hunger and malnutrition, to 
raise levels of investment, production and food security for the impoverished 
millions and to give an earnest of our determination to help ourselves, we 
must pool our respective endowments and experiences, and create an enduring 
machinery of powerful mutual partnership. How precisely this goal can 
India will play 
be reached is the concern of everyone in this conference. 
its part in such an endeavour. 

Support to Palestinian Cause 
IT IS A pleasure to welcome Your Excellency in our midst tonight. Yours 
is a household name in the Arab world and in all countries where freedom 
is cherished. We greet you as a valiant fighter against aggression and 
oppression, and as Chairman of the Palestinian Liberation Organization. 
Our sympathy for the Palestinian Arabs has been a part of independent 
India's foreign policy from its very inception. Even in the thirties, when we 
ourselves were struggling for freedom, Mahatma Gandhi and Jawaharlal 
Nehru spoke out against the injustices to \Vhich Arabs, and Palestinians 
in particular, were subjected. Thus, our support for the Palestinian cause 

· has been time-tested and consistent: 

I recall the 1973 Non-aligned Summit in Algiers where the non-aligned 
co111milnity first resolved to recognize the PLO as the legitimate representa0
tive of the Palestinian people. Since then, through your dedicated struggle 
ai1d years of patient hard work, courage, determination and sacrifice, every 
major international forum now recognizes the PLO as the voice of the 
Palestinian people. Your words are heard with respect regarding other 
and wider questions also. 

The plight of Palestinians has been one of the tragedies of history. Few 
people have been more systematically oppressed and humiliated in their 
I ,hope-indeed I am sure-this will change soon and that 
own land. 
achievement will be the key to harmony in West Asia. The PLO has striven 
to provide its people a distinct and forceful identity. The Palestinian people 
in turn have entrusted to you~ Chairman Arafat, the responsibility of leading 
I assure you of the full support of the people of India 
them to their destiny. 
in your struggle. 

In India, we are grappling with enormous and unprecedented economic 
problems which have been further aggravated in the last three years. 
International pressures and tensions are also mounting. 

Recent developments in our region are causing concern all over the 
world. We cannot remain unaffected. For centuries there has been foreign 
interference. We have always opposed any attempt from outside at 
influencing the internal affairs of other countries, and this includes 
the 
presence of foreign troops. Tranquillity and stability can seldom be restored 
through military solutions or the induction of armaments. Super-power 
rivalry and the recrudescence of cold war postures threaten peace which 
is an absolute necessity for economic development. Conditions must be 

Speech at dinner in honour of the Chairman of rhe Palestinian Liberation Organisation, 
Mr Yasser Arafat, New Delhi, 1\'.farch 28, 1980 

created through diplomatic and political initiatives which would enable 
countries of the region to retain their independence and non-alignment 

··. and remain free from any kind of interference by outside powers. 

· Your Excellency, I am confident that your visit to India will .prove to 
·.be another milestone in Indo 0Palestinian and ludo-Arab friendship. 
,;Ji~ve worked together actively in international forums and there has been 
India is not a power and 
notable expansion in our economic relationship. 
· · it is still at the developing stage. But thanks to the farsighted policy of my 
father, Jawaharlal Nehru, we have a large number of highly trained scientists 
and technologists. We have built an industrial base and a sound infrastruc-
ture which enables us to produce a variety of industrial and consumer goods 
for our own needs and for sharing with others. Even now there are 
several impresssive bilateral projects between 
the Arab 
countries. But there is a vast scope for further co-operation, for the 
pooling of our resources and skills, and directing them towards recognised 
needs.· We know of, and are grateful for, your personal interest in this matter. 
M1.1tual help will ·greatly strengthen individual natiqns as well as the · · 
developing world as a whole. 

India and 

Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen, I invite you to join me in wishing a · 

long life and success to our distinguished guest, lv!:r Yasser Arafat, Chairman 
of the Palestinian Liberation Organisation and to the cause of the Palestinian 
people. 

Sharing the Skills 
OUR COtJ1"fl'RY: FEELS pr~vileged to play host to His Excellency Mr. Pham 
Van Dong, Prime Minister of the Socialist Republic of Y.ietnam and the 
distinguished members of his entourage. 

For me it is a personal pleasure. Excellency, you are no stranger. 
You have been to India before, and through the years we have been meeting 
in various forums. We regard you as a friend of India and we hope you 
think of us as a sincere friend of Vietnam. 

Vietnam is not merely the name of a country. The word has found a 
place in the history of human endeavour and has come to symbolize the very 
spirit of national freedom. President Ho Chi Minh was one of the 
outstanding personalities of our age, providing leadership of a high calibre 
in its foresight and sagacity, with the rare combination of determination 
and gentle sympathetic understanding. 

Speech at lunch in honour of the Prime Minister of the Republic of Vietnam. Mr Pham 
Van Dong, New Delhi, April 9, 1980 

You have shown yourself a worthy successor, inspiring your countrymen 
and women with that basic quality-confidence in themselves and in their 
cause. Time and again the Vietnamese people have withstood and 
overcome challenges from powers far superior· to 
their own military 
strength. They have demonstrated that the might of arms and modern 
technology cannot subdue the soul of an indomitable and resolute people. 

After liberation and reunification, the Vietnamese leadership and people 
have brought the same single-minded dedication to the rebuilding of their 
war-torn country. This endeavour compels the same admiration as did 
your epic struggle. 
It also needs assistance from friendly countries and 
international organizations. 

. The developing countries are potentially rich. We need funds to fully 
utilize our resources. We need peace and stability to be able to get on with 
the job. Our two countries are struggling to develop mainly through our 
own natural resources and human endowments, keeping intact what is of 
value in the social, cultural and spiritual heritage of our peoples. .· India;s 
· experiments. in planned development have 
shown some results. Even 
though our problems are gigantic and there has been opposition at every 
step, we have acquired the scientific and technological competence to deal 
with them and to find indigenous solutions. At the same time we believe 
that developing countries should share their skills and resources to stimulate 
one another's development. We are glad that it has been possible for 
Vietnam and India to establish a number of joint programmes for our mutual 
benefit. 

The victory of the Vietnamese people should have been a lesson for all. 
Yet the same old policies of rivalry and confrontation continue. Grave 
problems confront the countries of South and South-East Asia. They must 
mt;.et these challenges themsleves. They must re-assert their right to conduct 
their affairs without outside interference. This right should be accepted and 
honoured by all. Too long have we put up. with foreign influences and 
It is time that we are left free of such presences, free from the 
interference. 
induction of arms, free from attempt~ at destabilization. 

.. r. 

hard choices or 

their consequences. Recent events 

soundness of 

integrity, non-interference 

India and Vietnam belong to the Non-aligned Movement. 

'We do not 
in our 
shirk 
neighbourhood strikingly underline the continuing 
the 
principles of non-alignment, especially the importance of sovereignty, 
territorial 
and peaceful coexistence. The 
present crisis can be resolved only through peaceful discussion. We are in 
consultation with our neighbours and other interested countries concerning 
the situation that has developed in our region. We must evolve co-ordinated 
responses to help in bringing about conditions which would 
reduce 
suspicions and apprehensions of encirclement. The task 
is seemingly 
intractable but-w_e are determined to persevere in our efforts ·on behalf of 
peace, for the alternative is too grim to contemplate. 

I cannot but remark on· the double standards that are being applied. 
Those who are expressing horror at events 
in Afghanistan were 
conspicuously silent when outside forces entered your own country not so 
long ago. The name of freedom is· invoked to buttress some of the most 
unfree personalities and regimes. 
I hope that the peoples of South and 
South-East Asia will be able to take courageous and wise decisions, singly and 
jointly, so as to re-establish a climate of co-operation in our area. 

Your visit at the present time has enabled us to exchange views on 
important international issues and to strengthen our existing close and 
friendly bilateral relations in the political, economic and cultural fields, and 
also to work together to promote the larger cause of world peace . 

India and EEC 
You ARE NO stranger to India, but you come today as President of the 
Commission of the European Community. This will give you and your 
many friends in India, who are acquainted with your wide-ranging political· 
and intellectual concerns, an oppo1tunity to renew old acquaintances and 
links. 

You are experiencing the warmth of our climate, I shall like to assure 

you also of the warmth of our sentiments. 

The European Community is an important experiment in co-operation 
among nations. 
In the last five years, a great deal has changed in the 
\Ve have followed with interest the 
European Community and in Asia. 
successful development of the European Community and the positive efforts 
it has been making in the .yjder comity of nations. 
It has branched out 
from regional economic co-operation to political consultation consistent with 
the strength of its members, and has emerged as an important political force 
in the world playing a constructive and noteworthy role in the great global 
issues of the present decade. As the Community is enlarged, its potential 
for such a role will be further increased. The great need in the world today 
is to so define national interest that it makes for greater harmony, greater 
equality and justice, and greater stability in the world. 

We have watched the emergence of the European Parliament on the basis 
of direct elections. Any new developments in democratic functioning are of 
special interest to us in India, with our commitment to parliamentary 
government. European ideas have long influenced us. We do not want 

Speech at banquet in honour of the President of 
Community, Mr Roy Jenkins, New Delhi, May 2, 1980 

the Commission of the European 

this important bond to languish, even as we evolve our own institutions to 
face our distinctive problems. 

The members of the European Comm-unity are developed countries. 
There is vast distan9e between them and us in economic and technological 
capability, for India is a developing country. The European Economic 
Community is a major trading partner of India. The opportunity to export 
our products to your markets means much to our workers and artisans and 
to the economic well-being of our country as a whole. Negotiations through 
international agencies and· forums should aim at reducing tariffs and giving 
further impetus to developing countries. 
It is crucial that while promoting 
greater trade among themselves, affluent countries should encourage more 
trade with the developing. Whatever the differences on some current ideas 
regarding a new world economic order, there should be no disagreement on 
the need to eliminate poverty. It is for this that poorer countries should get 
a greater share of world trade. 

\Ve are heartened by your own enlightened views on these issues. We 
hope that the new Commercial and Economic Co-operation Agreement, 
which we· shall soon negotiate, will-formaliie and strengthen- the relations . 
between India arid the European countries. 

The situation in the world and especially around our region of Asia is 
disquieting. We are all deeply concerned when the fires of suspicion are 
thus fanned, the tasks of economic management, which confront some 
developed countries and the war against want, which is so vital for us, get 
pushed to the background. We can ill-afford new confrontations. We 
must use our influence to cool down tempers. The European Community 
has a special responsibility. Tensions can be mitigated and confrontations 
avoided only if all countries which value peace and stability work together. 
In your perceptive writings you have advised men of power to be 
guided by wisdom and patience. These will be greatly needed in the days 
to come. 

The countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America want to strengthen 
themselves not only because of the human misery which poverty brings but. 
also because economic weakness is an invitation to intervention from outside. 
It has been active in our region for years, 
Interference wears many masks. 
with each new step producing further reactions. We, in India, are opposed 
to all forms of intervention and all outside military presences. Our 
overriding objective is peace: peace through mutual respect, reassurance and 
understanding, independence of judgement and action. 

Stand on South Africa 

QuESTION : How do you view the South African situation? Is there any 
change in your attitude towards South Africa since you returned to power? 
Do you see any change in South Africa's outlook? 

PRIME MINISTER: For almost ninety years the racial policies of the South 
African Whites have greatly exercised the minds of the Congress leadership. 
It is in South Africa, experiencing the discrimination meted out to Indian 
settlers, that Iv1ahatma Gandhi developed his unique methods of political 
action by which the weak could challenge the powerful. 

Since then, the struggles of the people of India for independence and of 
the Black people of Africa for self-rule have gone hand in hand. In other 
parts of Africa, the Blacks have come into their own. · Some yeai·s ago, I 
spoke at the Non-aligned Conference in Lusaka that the heartbeats of · 
Africa were sounding like. drums. With the liberatio.n · of Zimbabwe, the · 
I was elated· 
unfinished revolution came a step nearer to· its culmination. 
and greatly honoured to represent India at the independence ceremony in 
Salisbury. 

\Vhat lesson have the White,,,rulers of South Africa drawn from this 
inexorable march of history? Can they hope to be sheltered from the gale 
that is blowing? Neither military-economic strength nor subterfuge can 
help to withstand the united demand of the people for freedom. 

People of an earlier generation in India did not believe that India could 
be free in their lifetime. This was also said regarding the freedom of many 
African countries. But the unbelievable does happen. The present rulers 
of South Africa must realize this. 

Whether there will be a change of heart on South Africa's part, I cannot 
tell. Political hearts are not as easily transplanted as Dr Barnard's hearts. 
But until there is majority rule in South Africa, we, in India, and other 
countries will continue our policy of not having any political and economic 
dealings with the regime there. 
I stand steadfast by our time-tested policy 
with regard to racialism. There will be no halfway house, no deal and 
certainly no surreptitious diplomacy. 

Reply to a question by Mr Bobby Harrypersadh, News Edjtor of the Durban daily Post 
Natal, May 17, 1980 

Need for Concrete Action 
IT lS A privilege to have in our midst His Excellency l'vlr. Veselin Djuranovic, 
President of the Federal Executive Council of Yugoslavia, and · the 
distinguished members of his delegation. Their country has many notable 
achievements to its credit and we value our close bonds of friendship and 
trust with it. 

Excellency, I met you last on the sad occasion when President Tito, 
that outstanding warrior, maker of modern Yugoslavia and greatly respected 
world statesman, was laid to rest. 
It was my privilege to have known 
President Tito closely. 
I had high admiration for his deep love for his 
country and concern for its freedom and unity, and his contribution to 
peace. 

· Yugoslavia and India had not been thrown together by history until 

our own days when Jawaharlal Nehru and Jo sip BrozTito became co~workers .. 
and good friends. But there have been similarities in our respective national 
experiences and achievements. We have both known what it is to lose 
freedom and regain it. We have woven the strands of diverse races, religions 
and languages into the rich fabric of national unity. . President Tito once 
described the strength of Yugoslavia as arising from the morale of its people, 
from their "consciousness of unity which grew like a fire", and from the 
clarity with which they saw their perspectives. That indeed is how our own 
. Indian nationhood was forged. 

The national genius for adaptation · and synthesis predisposed our 
countries towards the concept of coexistence. Realizing that international 
stability and the domination of any one group over others is incompatible, 
we chose non-alignment. 

The history of the Non-aligned Movement is too well known to be • 

Its conceptual relevance is as valid as in the early fifties. 

It has withstood attempts and attacks to divide its ranks. 

repeated. 
In 
spite of the weaknesses which ha,Je crept in, it remains a force in international 
Indeed, so 
life. 
long as the great powers continue to seek vassals and forge military alliances, 
so long must the non-aligned persevere in their struggle against the carving 
of the world into blocs and spheres of influence. 

We cannot but be dismayed by the deterioration in the international 
situation. With what enthusiasm President Tito and we welcomed detente ! 
Now the direction is reversed. There are new confrontations. On the 
military side, the nuclear arms race has acquired an autonomous momentum 

Speech at banquet in honour .of the President, Mr Vcselin Djuranovic of the Federal 
E,i:ecutive Council of Yugoslavia, New Delhi, September 26, 1980 

of its own. 
can a nuclear confrontation be avoided? 

If the action and reaction to which we are witness continues, 

It is said that war is,.too important to be left to generals and politics too 
important to be left to politicians. But, is the .survival of mankind not 
important enough to be the concern of all countries? Can we allow certain 
powers to play around with our fates? 
I don't doubt for a moment that 
people all over the world, in every country, want peace. Can we not harness 
this will towards concrete action by governments? 

We are deeply distressed by the old and new developments on our 
to us geographically and directly affect us 

continent, some are close 
economically. 

I don't want to dwell on these various crises in different parts of the 
world .. Our views have been clearly and repeatedly stated and we are 
discussing these issues. V-le are against any kind of foreign interference or 
subversion. We welcome all efforts aimed at removing present · dangers 
whiletakirig into account the legitimate interests and security concerns of all · 
I hope that non~allgned nations will make their . 
the involved parties. 
customary constructive efforts to reduce tensions and create conditions for 
peaceful resolutions of problems. 

The global economic crisis is equally threatening. The economies of 
many small. and vulnerable nations are near collapse. The future of all 
countries, big or small, is closely interlinked. Inflation, the increasing cost 
of oil and growing protectionism in the industrialized world have vastly 
aggravated the problems of development in the developing world. Affluent 
countries which consume a disproportionate share of all resources, cannot 
remain untouched. Fundamental changes are required in international 
economic institutions. We have a plethora of reports and recommendations. 
Let us now have bold and concrete action. 

The struggle for a more equitable international econon1ic order is, in 
a way, the big challenge for the Non-aligned Movement in the ',80s. We 
have the ability to resolve differences which might today appear irreconcilable 
and to evolve a common approach which ensures a better economic future 
for us all. Let us not be disheartened by setbacks 
the process of 
negotiations. The struggle must go on in the spirit of co-existence and 
co-operation which are central to the philosophy of the non-aligned. As a 
beginning, we can perhaps help one another 
in solving our economic 
difficulties and giving practical shape to the ideals of economic and technical 
co-operation among developing countries. Each can profit from the 
other's experience. 

in 

Excellency, your visit to India has provided us with the opportunity to 
discuss in detail some of the more important issues of our times, as also the 
steps that our two countries can take to extend and strengthen our bilateral 
relations. 
I am glad that you are accompanied by the Federal Secretary for 

lNTBRNATIONAL AFFAIRS 

Foreign Trade of Yugoslavia, H.E. Mr. Rotar, with whom we can. discuss 
and identify new areas of economic and commercial co-operation. 

U.N. Day 

MANKIND IS ONE family. The separate nations into which humanity is 
divided should live in co-operation and not pursue confrontation. There 
have been conflicts in the past, but conflict now, with the development of 
nuclear weapons, will spell ruin for the victor, no less than the vanquished. 
Progress means rejecting factors that divide and the acceptance of those that 
unite. The United Nations Organization and· its agencies must enable 
people of various nation-states to .recognize their duty to . the , world 
.. community and to evolve more civilized modes of conduct among peoples. 
Support of UN has been one of the basic tenets of our foreign policy. 
· We have not hesitated to stand alone in matters involving principle, in the 
spirit of Rabindranath Tagore's song 'Ekla Chalo'. At the same time we 
believe in working in harmony with the maximum number of nations. On 
United Nations Day, 24th October, I call upon all citizens of the country to 
reaffirm their adherence to world peace and the spirit of international 
brotherhood. 

Indo-Mauritian Ties 
f TIS A special pleasure to wekome you amongst us this evening. You are a 
friend of long standing. Trained in the art of healing, Dr Ramgoolam is 
the founding father of the Mauritian nation. He is a statesman respected 
in the world's capitals. He has made significant contribution to the 0.A.U., 
the Commonwealth and the Non-aligned Movement. To us, he is the symbol 
of ludo-Mauritian 
Recently, he celebrated his 80th 
birthday. Here, in India, this occasion is referred to as the 
'Sahasra 
Chandra Darshan', that is, the seeing of a thousand moons. It also marked 
the 40th anniversary of your long record as a Member of the Mauritius 

friendship. 

Message sent on October 19, 1980 for the United Nations Day (October 24). 

- Speech-at banquet in honour of the Prime Minister of Mauritius, Sir Seewoosagur 

Ramgoolam, New Delhi, October 28, 1980 

Parliament. Within .tvfauritius itself, you are a symbol of unity and of the 
harmonious coexistence of different races, religions and cultures. A 
nation may be small or big, contiguous to a land mass or surrounded by vast 
stretches of sea, but no nation can be insulated from international crises in 
these days of instant information and economic interlinkage. Long ago. 
Galileo demonstrated that gravity acts the same on all objects irrespective 
of their size. Doesn't it apply to nations as well? A wise Government 
shares its assessment with its people and, through mutual trust between 
Government and people, develops the inner strength to meet challenges. 
Mauritius and India follow the path of parliamentary democracy which rests 
on the foundations of the people's sovereignty. Through sharing of 
knowledge and ideals among the various groups which constitute our 
respective nations, each of us can convert our very diversity into a sour~e of 
strength. 

Today's world is engulfed in crises. 

.To many, detente is no longer a 
·. welcome word or. even a desired policy. The.re are attempts to destabilize 
· established Governments. . This decade threatens to become one of 
·. confrontation and even conflagration. . There are ne~ threats to peace. to 
our neighbourhood. 
.More than ever before there is the need to reaffirm 
the principles of the non-use of force and non-intervention in internal 
affairs and to seek a resolution of differences by peaceful dialogue. 

The movement for non-alignment needs to be more united and cohesive 
and that should be our main task in the forthcoming 11inisterial Conference. 
The more one studies the problems and troubles of contemporary world, 
the more one is convinced of the continuing relevance of the principles of 
non-alignment. Two main causes for tension are the military and growing 
inequality between nations and within nations, and also the delay in the 
establishment of a new world economic order. There is urgent neeq for a 
joint and peaceful search for a balance between global productioii and 
consumption and.preserving non-renewable resources and our environment. 
India and Mauritius are bound by'ties of friendship and, beyond these, 
by common ideals of international peace and goodwill. Our two countries 
have worked together in international forums for freedom, for racial equa-
lity, for a more civilized and equitable economic order. Bilaterally, we are 
steadily trying to enlarge the economic. technical and cultural co-operation 
between our two countries. 

Indo-Danish Friendship 
I HAVE GREAT pleasure in extending a warm welcome to you, Mr Prime 
Minister, to Mme. Jorgensen and to the distinguished members of the Danish 
delegation. We attach great importance to this visit, for it was 18 years ago 
that we last had the privilege of receiving a Prime Minister of Denmark. 

I remember my own visit to Denmark many years ago. The name of 
Prof. Niels Bohr is familiar to all who are interested in modern knowledge 
and in humanitarian causes. And which child has not been captivated by 
remarkable Dane Hans Andersen? 
In my childhood I had also read of the 
coming of Danish seafarers and traders to India along with other Europeans 
in the seventeenth century, but, apart from setting up posts at .Serampore and 
Tranquebar, they made no attempt to establish an empire here. 
In. my 
·. mind was created an impression of the reasonableness of the Danish people, 

and, rouch later, this was confirmed 'by the support you gave us at the time . 
of the formation of.Bangladesh, and the wise stand you have taken on many 
world issues . 

. Denmark's progress is a remarkable success story. You are not 
endowed with many natural resources, yet through education and scientific 
development, you have been able to provide your people the blessings of 
technological prosperity. I have heard of your old song "Few shouid have 
too much and fewer still too little". This is au apt motto for all nations--for 
nothing is more repugnant to true humanity or dangerous to world peace 
than disparities. 

Over the years, some of our experts have stu~ied and benefited from 
your folk schools system, and we have also learnt mi;ch from your advances 
in dairying. Countless Indian chiidren thus have reason to be grateful to 
Denmark. 

Your present visit, Mr Prime Minister, gives us an opportunity to review 
the progress of Danish-Indian relations which have grown steadily over the 
years. There is scope for further increase in trade and cultural co-operation. 
The research effort that you have put into technology, in marine science 
and oceanography holds out opportunities 
for new areas of working 
together. 

All nations, big or small, in whichever continent they are situated, are 
in the grip of uncertainty and anxiety. There is erosion of detente and close 
to us, in India, tensions and suspicions have grown. There is inadequate 
appreciation · among the big powers of the strength of feeling regarding 

Speech at dinner in honour of the Prime Minister of Denmark, Mr Ank~r Jorgensen, 
New Delhi, October 31, 1980 

foreign influence and presence on land or sea in this region. Both Iraq 
and Iran are good friends of ours. We are in touch with them both and 
join others in a mission of goodwill. 

The global crisis is part political, part economic. 

In any distress, the 
hardest hit are the weak. Developing countries are the worst sufferers in 
the world-wide inflation that has followed the successive increases in prices 
of oil and capital goods. Our endeavour to give our people the basic 
amenities of life has becon:;ie so much more difficult because of the 
phenomenal rise in our import bills. 

squeezed and their hopes for 

The international economic order is badly in need of overhaul. 
Developing nations, many of which depend on raw material exports, find 
their markets 
a democratically-based 
international order confounded. In this debate, we are glad that Denmark 
has consistently adopted an attitude of sympathy and helpfulness towards 
the aspirations of developing countries. You · are one of the very few 
countries whose ui:iderstanding has taken a tangible form. 

· . We have had .useful discussions this afternoon. 

lam glad that you 
have been able to find tinie from your heavy preoccupations to see something 
of India outside Delhi. 
\Ve hope this glimpse will give you some idea of 
our struggle to achieve technological transformation while conserving our 
cultural heritage, the classical as well as the folk. 

Democratic Set-up 

QUESTION: There is growing criticisJ of the World Bank and the IMF. 
Do you, see these 
institutions undergoing reforms to deal with current 
economic problems more realistically? 

PRIME MINISTER : Most things depend on the people who run institutions 
rather than the institutions themselves. 

QUESTION : It is not the people who run these institutions that are under 
It is the institutional structure itself. The structure of voting and 
attack. 
decision-making powers which do not take into account the new realities. 
Do you see these institutions adjusting themselves to the new realities? 

PKIME MINISTER : I don't see them adjusting enough. But they exist. 

Prom the 
! April 1981 issue 

interview ,0 

the London fortnightly magazine The South, 15 March· 

QUESTION : India is affected by the increase in oil prices. How do you react 
to OPEC policies? 

PRIME MINISTER : It is the same thing as protectionism. Nations lo-ok at 
their immediate interests but they do not see how their short-term policies 
will affect them in the future. The same applies 
to the working of the 
If you have reforms in good time, it would produce 
international bodies. 
a hopeful picture. 

If you do not, the future becomes uncertain. 

QuEsnoN : Stili on the question of institutions. You may have seen the 
paper that 11r. B. K. Nehru wrote about the working of democratic insti-
that one must 
tutions left by the British in their colonies. Assuming 
have a democratic set-up, would you say that the British-style institutions 

·. in India are capable of responding to the needs of the masses? 

PRIHE i'v1INISTER : Well, these institufions lead toward the status quo and that 
makes change more difficult. But it all depends on the type of peopie who · . 
. are there: The same structure could be used much more effectively. 

QUESTION : In several countries, the British-style institutions are crumbling. 
How do you see their future in India? 

PRTME MINISTER : lvfost of us, I am not talking of myself, but of the previous 
generation, were not interested in government for itself. To them it was the 
Iviahatma Gandhi said all the time, and 
extension of the freedom struggle. 
so did my father, that political freedom is not the end of the 
struggle. 
On the contrary, it is. the beginning of a new struggle for economic 
independence. Politfoal freedom only gave us the opportunity to fight the 
economic battles of the country in order to eradicate poverty and to lessen 
the disparities. 

QUESTION : How would you apply this to Bangladesh? 

PRIME :tvfrNISTER : Well, it was a bloody stn1ggle but of quite a different kind. 
Sheikh Mujeeb was involved in the struggle, but not in the same way as the 
others. He took over after he came out of the prison. 
I think he lost the 
opportunity at that time to judge who was who and who could have given 
the right direction at that moment. He had not been in touch. 

QUEST~ON : But take Zimbabwe. There too the institutions are creating 
In the Caribbean, tbe Jamaican institutions are also going 
problems. 
through a very hard time. One begins to wonder whether these instiiu-
dons really meet the needs of the people. 

PR~ME Iv1INISTER : All right, suppose they don't, what do you have in their 
place. Whatever institutions you have, they can be corrupted. 

QUESTION : But Madam Prime Minister, what you are saying is that .for 
lack of a better alternative we had better learn to live with these institutions. 

PRIME MINISTER: Well, they are not ideal, but no institution is ideal. For 
instance, 'Winston Churchill said of democracy that it is the most fragile of 
It is the best among available 
systems but we do not have anything better. 
institutions. 

QUESTION : You said a little while ago that the present democratic system 
perpetuates the status quo. 

PRIME MINISTER :,,No, no. 1 said it leads to the status quo. 
It happens in 
India where a ceitain class · dominates many of the institutions. In a 
dr)mocracf certain · powerful elements do exert an influence. But ·it is a 
question of balance and counter-balance. The louder. voice is that of a 
smaller but H more powerful group and that is counter-acted by the larger 
group which has the vote. Take, for instance, the judiciary. Now, I am 
not saying it is not fair or anything like that. But these people largely 
belong to a particular class. As :J'vfr. Roosevelt found in America, they had 
certain class interests. We found the same thing when we nationalized the 
banks. But what do you have instead of these institutions? Nobody 
has come up with an idea. The real answer is decentralization, but it can 
only be in the context of a strong centre and this is not really contradictory 
because you can't decentralize in a way which would allow things to just 
drift apai:t. There has to be something that holds everything together. 
That is what we have been trying to do with our Panchayat system. Biit 
again every institution does get into the hands of. those who are more 
powerful in a particular area. There is no way out except to try and balance 
it in some way when that happens. We have done it. Our Green 
Revolution was absolutely essential for our survival. And there is no doubt 
that it put India on its feet. At the same time, it increased the gap. I mean, 
it helped the richer farmer more than the man that irrigated the land. Now, 
we could not stop that because it was absolutely essential to feed the country. 
What we need to do is to help the smaller farmer. 

QUESTION : Prime Iviinister, if I were to suggest that when the system does 
not respond to change, you have situations like Iran. 

PRIME i\1IN/STER : Yes. Either you have that kind of situaiion or the Russian 
type of situation. But I did not touch on that because you said we would 
discu~s the problem within the democratic set-up. 
\Ve do not have these 

It is not that at all. 

institutions because Britain or America says that they are good for us and 
It is because democracy permits 
we must have them. 
explosion that you could control. If you have a system which does not 
allow even a small explosion, then you h!J.ve bigger explosions which are 
uncontrollable. That is why in a country like India we feel that we have a 
system where people have a say in their affairs and such a system has to be 
ultimately democratic. 

QUESTION : Do you feel you are leading India in that direction? Are the 
people getting more say in their affairs in the provinces? 

PRIME MINISTER : It is not the provinces. The provinces already have a lot 
of say. What we are trying to do is to involve and mobilize the people at the 
It is not enough to say that we are going to 
:village level, the district level. 
give you the power to make your decisions. They must be able to see their 
decisions in the context of national needs. Otherwise, each man will be for 
himself and each group for itself. 
I can't say this is what I want witho_~t 
considering v;hat my neighbour wants. This is the task of the centre, not 
necessarily Delhi, but the centre in each area. 
I think 
we are advancing, but we are nowhere near the goal. All kinds of 
impediments keep cropping up. 

It is a slow process. 

: Ivfadam Prime Minister, it seems your personal popularity 
QUEST!ON 
remains undiminished, but your government's popularity is not what it was 
when you were re-elected. . There is a feeling of alienation among the 
intellectuals. 

PRIME !v[INISTER: Well, unfortunately;'the so-called intellectuals have always 
It is certainly not for anything that we have done 
been feeling alienated. 
because we do believe that they have a very important role to play in the 
development of the country and in creating the right 
for 
development and for the many changes that must take place. This year 
has been an extraordinarily difficult year. We inherited problems of vast 
dimensions, not the old problems caused by neglect and mismanagement or, 
I would say, wrong thinking about certain things. For example, the close 
interrelation between industry and agriculture was largely ignored. And 
we inherited a drought. We inherited a shortage of certain essential 
commodities, sugar for instance. Then the price of oil has been consistently 
rising during this period. Global inflation is affecting our economy. All 
this had to make an adverse impact on the general public here. 
\Vith all the 
goodwill in the world we couldn't produce sugar if it hadn't been planted in 

atmosphere 

sufficient quantities. Then the infrastructure had been weakened. Even 
the distribution system was distorted. Had it been run properly, it could 
have assuaged these difficulties to some extent. For us, this has been a year 
when we have been trying to make up for lost time. When we were elected, 
people expected us to perform· miracles. Those were not forthcoming; so 
naturally many of them are disappointed. 

Similar Problems and Shared Anxieties 
IT 1s A privilege to have in our midst the Hon'ble Robert Mugabe, brave 

fighter for freedom and distinguished nation-builder. 'We welcome also his 
gracious lady, J\1rs Sally lvfugabe, and the distinguished m.embers of the 
Indian women wilL be glad to know of the great· 
Zimbabwean delegation. 
work for women which Mrs lviugabe is doing in her cou11try. 
great importance to your visit to India. 
ting on our own soil a valiant son and a distinguished daughter of Africa. 

\Ve· atta~h . · 
It gives us the opportunity of salu-· · 

Many have been the links between Africa and Asia. 

In fact, the 
renowned scholar and statesman. Dr. Senghor. came here some years ago 
in search of confirmation of his ideas on the links between Dravidian and 
African culture. Contacts between freedom struggles in Africa and India 
date back to the twenties, the days of the League Against Imperialism. 
when my father first met many leaders from Africa. Even though fully 
immersed in our own struggle, our moral support extended beyond 
the 
oceans to all those who were similarly chafing against domination by 
outsiders. After our independence we could and did give more tangible 
help. 

It was a special pleasure for me to be able to participate in the impressive 
functions in Salisbury-I learn that you are now thinking of changing the 
name and giving it a name more appropriate to free Zin1babwe-to usher 
in your independence and to share in the rejoicing in your hour of triumph. 
During seven long years of bitterness and cruel war, Mr Prime Minister, your 
vision of humanity remained unblurred and in moments of decision you have 
reached out for reconciliation. Sir Winston Churchill, against whose 
policies both you and we fought, once declared : "In war: resolution. 
In 
defeat: defiance. 
In peace: goodwill". This 
indeed is the path which India and Zimbabwe have set for themselves. We 
have watched with interest how you and your colleagues are working together 

In victory : magnanimity. 

Speech at dinner in honmu- of the Prime Minl,1<:i' or Zimbabwe, Mr. Robert G. Mngabe, 
New Delhi, May 21, 1981 

in the service of the people of Zimbabwe, concentrating on building for the 
future. 

Freedom is the lifting of one kind of burden but the beginning of other 
far heavier resp_onsibilities to which is added the challenge of the people's 
rising expectations. Development we must have to solve human problems 
and equally to give us the capability to safeguard our independence. Each 
succeeding year, with its rapid scientific and technological advance, helps 
those whose earlier pr.osperity was based on their colonization of our peoples 
and gave them a headstart, but it complicates matters for developing 
countries who have to make up for lost time. Thus is widened the gap 
between us and those who are already at a high level of economic 
development. The interest in and concern for a New International Economic 
Order is growing but not yet amongst those who can do most about it. 

No single nation is without economic· and other problems. But ours 
are of particular urgency. We cannot afford to be distracted from the much 
larger and far more crucial labour of eliminating economic backwardness.· 
Only economic freedom and enlargement of_ opportunity . will give true.·. · 
· content and meaning to political freedo111. 
and technological self-reliaiice. Vle know that Zimbabwe is well endowed · 
with agricultural and mineral resources and already has a good industrial 
base. The bilateral agreements that are currently being finalized, should be 
a good beginning for extensive economic, 
cultural 
co-operation between our two countries. 

In India, our goal is economic 

technological and 

I am interested in the stability and strength of our neighbours-near 
and far-and especially amongst the non-aligned. Those who have similar 
problems and shared anxieties, should assist one another on a basis.of equal· 
respect and for mutual benefit. 

On our continents there are unresolved conflicts. We, the non-aligned, 
have always tried to find peaceful solutions through discussions. A threat 
to peace any·where is a threat to welfare and progress everywhere. At 
various lev.:ls and in different spheres, we must all co-operate in finding 
solutions to international issues. 

Across your border, the people· of South Africa are oppressed victims 
of humiliation and injustice. 
India's support to their struggle for political 
and human rights has been consistent and firm, and will continue. We 
do not doubt that ultimate victory will be theirs. The spark kept alight so 
courageously by warriors like Nelson Mandela cannot be extinguished. 
No less valiant is the struggle of S\VAPO in Namibia against illegal 
occupation of their country by the Pretoria regime. Mr Sam Nujoma's 
reasonable and conciliatory attitude at the Geneva talks were of no avail. 
On the excuse of making it stronger, there are now attempts to dilute the 
UN Resolution on Namibia's independence. These must be thwarted. 
ln facing the challenge of these racist regimes, the solidarity- of Zimbabwe 
with the frontline States is a source of strength to the peoples of those 

countries. These are also our friends with whom we are closely and regularly 
in touch. 

Imperialism, racialism and military · might look formidable, especially 
at close quarters. But people forget that the world is inhabited not by 
statistics but by men and wom:en. And when they have a dream in their 
eyes, when their minds are moved by the spirit of nationalism and their 
hearts afire with the love for freedom, then as a poet has said: 'There can 
never be a wall so strong. or steel or gun to hold us back from our share of 
the sun'. 

Co-operation among Developing Countries 

THANK You, MR PRESIDENT, for the warmth of th~ welcome I have received 
since my arrival, and for your kind words. 
I thank you for the invitation 
which brought me to your beautiful land and enables me to offer to you and 
to the Government and people of Kenya, the greetings and good wishes of 
the Indian people. 

Vivid in my memories are recollections of your Independence Day 
celebrations when the air resounded with drum beat and song and above all 
the towering personality of your great leader Mzee Jomo Kenyatta. 
\Vith 
his guidance your people fought and sacrificed and·won the right to a place 
of respect among the fa.mily of sovereign nations, and established a truly 
multi-racial society where distinctions of religion and race do not count. 
Under your own enlightened leadership Kenya has maintained its stability. 
It has forged ahead and is making impressive economic progress. 

Before Jomo Kenyatta led Kenya to freedom and became a world-

renowned figure, he wrote Facing Mount Kenya. Indeed every nation faces a 
mountain of challenge. The mountain-top shines and beckons. But the 
climb is steep and the path is hard. Only those who put all their strength 
in the effort can go high enough towards freedom and dignity. 

Freedom is never easy-each succeeding phase brings its own difficulties. 
As India completes 34 years of its own independence, we see hO\v solutions 
themselves create new problems. Compared to where we were, we have 
come far. 
In terms of economic strength and industrial capacity, we are 
counted among the first dozen. But the rising demands of our people and 

Speech at banquet hosted b, 
August 10, l98l 

the President of K<:rt)'[l. Mr D:U1iel T. Amp MoL Nairobi, 

the pledges we have taken are a constant reminder that we still have a Jong 
way to go. 

Every country must follow its own path to consolidate its independence 
and to solve its problems with its own inner capacity. The experiences of 
others do help, but each must make its own assessment and choice and decide 
what to accept and what to reject. We feel that if our sights are fixed on the 
star of self-reliance, we cannot go wrong. 
Independence does not conflict 
with interdependence, nor self-reliance with co-operation, but all relation, 
ships must be on the basis of equality and mutual respect. 

Mr President, Kenya and India are guided by the ideal of social and 
economic justice for their people and are endeavouring to build a prosperous 
future for their citizens. 

Our geographical proximity and the complementary nature of our 
infrastructures make it easier for us to work together in the economic field. 
Naturally, we are glad that technical co-operation between our two countries 
. has progressed satisfactorily. 
acquired some. experience in 
· a!!ficultural ancl industrial development and in research and education . 
which, within the bonstraints of our economic situation, we share with others. 
· From Kenya we· have much to learn, particularly in the vital sphere of 
conservation of natural assets. 
In fact, our links date far back into history. 
\Ve even have plants and grains now regarded as our own but, which we 
learn, originally came from East Africa. 

India · has 

Yet, disparities between 

the developed and developing countries 
persist and grow. Hence, our ardent support for what is called the New 
International Economic Order. The protectionist practices of the 
industrially developed world harm all developing countries. Only through 
closer co-operation amongst ourselves can we mitigate this hardship to some 
extent. 

The greatest obstacle to development and to 

the improvement in the 
living standards of the majority of the world's peoples.who live in Africa and 
Asia, is the climate of distrust and confrontation among nations and th~ 
massive diversion of resources frol!l human welfare to the engines of war. 

Kenya and India have worked for world peace. Peace is an ideal in 
itself, but for us it is also a practical necessity to complete our plans for 
development. Unfortunately, there has been a sharp increase in the tensions 
and rivalries between the big powers in various regions of the world. The 
Indian Ocean is a bridge between our shores. 
In 1971, the United Nations 
declared it a Zone of Peace. But scant regard has been paid to this. Big 
power military presence and confrontation is escalating in this part of the 
world. Sophisticated arms are being inducted. Kenya, India and other 
non-aligned nations must find a way to reverse this trend. 

As man has pierced the sky to worlds beyond, _ his knowledge and 
capacity seem limitless,. but on _the way he seems to have lost vision, his 
idealism and even, dare I say it, the hope that was his driving force. And so 

mankind remains trapped in the vicious circle of greed, the desire to possess, 
to influence and to wield power. But we in the developing world struggle 
on. Freedom is under constant threat, for development can never be fast 
enough to reach all, especially in the race with a burgeoning population. So 
impatience and discontent are bred. This situation is taken advantage of by 
the unscrupulous and the interested. 
Inequalities, which we were fighting 
to end, continue nationally not only because of our own difficulties but also 
because they are vastly aggravated by global disparities, inequities and power 
struggles in which the economic and military aspects are enmeshed. And 
our concern is even greater, for the arena of conflict has moved to our 
continents. 

The peoples of Africa face yet another peril. On your continent there 
exists a regime which believes in the outdated and discredited doctrine of 
racial superiority. There can be no compromise with apariheid. 
In 
fighting it, every nation, in whatever continent, should regard itself as a 
frontline state. · I should iike to take this · opportunity to reaffirm the 
soHdarity of the people of India with the. brave freedom :fighters of Southern . 
Africa. We support.the efforts made by the Organization of African Unity, 
under your distinguished chairmanship, to uphold Africa's free personality 
and to overcome the political and economic challenges that confront Africa. 
The resurgent vigour and genius of this great continent cannot be suppressed, 
and will prevail. 

We have had useful exchange of views. The world media and press 
give little news of Africa, Asia or Latin America unless there is a coup or 
some disaster. The day-to-day effort, the constant endeavours, the many 
small achievements that gradually change the people's lives are not considered 
exciting enough. That is why the ex.change of visits and discussions assume 
much importance. 
In today's fast moving world no one can afford ignorance 
of what is happening elsewhere. 

Distinguished guests, I request you to raise your giasses to the good 
health and happiness of His Excellency President Daniel T.Arap Moi, to 
the progress and prosperity ofthe people of Kenya and to long-lasting 
friendship between Kenya and India. 

Basic Tenets of India's Foreign Policy 

QUESTION : Well, the danger of the proliferation of the nuclear weapons 
is rather increasing at this moment, and so, what would be the best way 
. to check it? 

PRIME MINISTER : I think the best way is gradual disarmament, general 
disarmament, but more specially nuclear disarmament. The continued 
increase in nuclear weaponry is a comment on the failure of the treaty-the 
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. 

We've had only one nuclear experiment which was purely for peaceful 
and developmental purposes. Our scientists· wanted to see whether thev 
can use it .especi'ally when we have to n1ake big dams in the niountains, or 
. something like that. · And ours was perfectly clean and i:t was undergrounl 
Why we haven't signed the Nuclear Non~Proliferation Treaty is because we 
feel fr is highly discriminafory. 
It is allowing the countries who have nuclear 
weapons, to stockpile more nuclear weapons, but it says a country like India 
cannot use it for peaceful purposes. 

QUESTION : You think there's some possibility of another test? 

PRirvrn .rv1INlSTER : No, we don't know. 
scientists want it, then we will think about it. 
political reasons. 

If we feel it is necessary, if our 
It has nothing to do with 

QUESTION : In case Pakistan may be armed with a nuclear weapon, are you 
going to develop your nuclear weapons by yourself? 

PRIME MINISTER : We are not dependant on what Pakistan does, you know; 
we have to make our policy independently. So far as Pakistan is concerned, 
if there is a fight-which we hope there will not be-it is more likely to be 
with conventional weapons. 

QUESTION : I'd like to know what are the basic principles of the foreign 
policy of India? 

PRIME MINISTER : India has consistently worked for peace, for friendship, 
for increasing the areas of co-operation amongst nations. We want to 

E-xcerpts from interview with Mr Teruo Kunugi of the Japanese daily Asahi Shimburi, 
New Delhi, September 21, 1981 

increase friendship where it exists, to try and create friendship where it does 
not exist; and where there is hostility, to try and blunt it and soften it. 
Non-alignment is one of the important features of our foreign policy. 

Just as growing confrontation and armament race is dangerous to 
world peace, so is the growing gap between the rich and the poor countries. 
Therefore, we think the North-South dialogue and co-operation is essential. 
The Non-aligned Movement, therefore, has a double role-first, it should 
try to focus on the more basic problems, and secondly, not get involved in 
bilateral issues or anything like that. And the basic problems are: one, the 
problem of peace or war, and second, of the economic development of these 
countries. So, how to have greater co-operation among ourselves-this 
is the major thing before us, so that we can also work better for peace. 

QUESTION : You used to say that you are not pro-Soviet, but pro-India. 
But I think it is a fact that many countri.es regard India as more pro-Soviet 
than· pro~United States. 

PRIME MINISTER : We are n_either pro-Soviet ·nor pro-USA; we are not 
anti-Soviet, cir anti-USA, or anti-China, or against any other country; we 
are pro-India, and we are non-aligned. But the Western _Press has tried to 
project this image. 

When we became free, we wanted to set up a steel plant in the state 
sector; we asked the United States first of all. They said they will not help 
the government; they will help a private industrialist. When the USA 
rejected, we went to the Soviet Union, and they said yes, they would do 
it. But we have not allowed that help to influence our thinking, our 
assessment of a situation, our judgement, or our actions. 

QUESTION : You mean, the perception and reality is quite oifferent? But 
it seems to me that you just let,the perception. 

PRIME MINJSTER : No, but what can we do about it? We have not only 
tried, we have actually succeeded in diversifying our industry. Even defence 
purchases we have tried to make from different countries so that we are not 
dependant on one. 

QUESTION : Well, when your Government recognized the Heng Samrin 
Government, most people felt that it was not simply the carrying out your 
manifesto of the election, that you had some hidden intention. 

PRIME MINlSTER : No, I can assure you there was no hidden intention. When 
we took the decision before, or during the elections, and put it in our 
manifesto, we did it after very deep thought and considering -all 
aspects. 

QUESTION : About Afghanistan or about Cambodia, I think international 
feeling, well, Western feeling ... is that they cannot support any regime 
who are imposed by any foreign military power. What do you think? 

I mean 
PRIME MINISTER : Well, why do they interfere in countries then? 
they have constantly removed governments: in Latin America, in Asia, 
in Africa-they have put in the people who are more pliable. You can't 
have double standards; if you're going to stand on high principles in one 
place, that must apply to other places as well. 

When the Soviet troops went into Afghanistan, most of the world 
started shouting. Now, what did it gain ... ? Did you achieve anything? 
I think it made the situation very much more difficult. 
I think the Soviets 
don't want to stay; it's not in their interests to stay. The Soviet Union 
can withdraw, everywhere you have to see what is the end you want, and 
then what are the steps towards it. 

Secret of Strength 

QuESTlON: Mrs Gandhi, India is often called the world's biggest democracy 
\,Vhen a country faces problems the size of India's, how difficuli is it to 
persevere with the democratic system of government? 

PRIME MINISTER ; I have expressed myself on this idea many times. The 
question is: is there a better system or a more workable system? 
India is 
a country of not only vast size but of tremendous diversity and within 
each State there are areas quite different in customs, lcinguage, dress, food 
habits and, above all, they are a bigly individualistic people. If you tell 
them "don't do this", they are more likely to do it. And democracy 
is a system which gives them just that manoeuvrability in which everybody 
can be himself and yet be very much a part of the whole. 

QUESTlON : But in other countries, with some of the problems that India 
faces, democracy seems to be considered an indulgence. Clearly not in 
India? 

PRIME MINISTER : Well, I can't talk about other countries. But I know 
that in my country no other system would work. But it is also true that the 
concept of democracy, not exactly parliamentary democracy as it is now 
working, but the concept of people's participation in decision-making is as 

Interview to New Zealand TV, October 4, 1981 

old as Buddha's time. We then had elected asemblies where the local people 
gave their views. 

QUESTION : You are clearly a strong leader and I am interested in the way 
in which strong leadership balances against democratic practice. In securing 
economic progress for India, would you again think of abandoning some of 
the elements of democracy? 

PRIME MINISTER : I am a little amused by the word 'strong'. You know 
there are people in India who think that I am not strong. And the constant 
complaint in letters and so on is: why don't you deal more strongly with 
such and such people and so on and so forth? Now, where does strength 
It is not also mere 
come from? 
intellectual strength. What is strength? Strength is the support of the 
people. And the. people will support you only so long as you are 
listening to them and you have your finger on their pulse. The minute 
they . think that . you . have diverted from that; you are nothing .and 
nobody. 

It is not muscle strength any more. 

QUESTION : I want to take up this question of strength because I think 
it bears on the period of Emergency between 197 5 and 1977 when thousands 
of people went to jail. You curbed civil rights. You censored the Press. 
To what extent was it your view then that an authoritarian rule would help 
to cure or to deal with India's economic and social problems ? 

PRIME MINISTER : My view was exactly the same as it is now. But a situation 
arose in which I felt that the cou1:try had to be shaken up and given a shock. 
Suddenly it seemed as if we wete drifting towards chaos, utter 
lack of 
responsibility on everybody's part and so on. So when one has, say, a 
sutlden illness, you have to take medicine for it. But that is not your nonnaJ. 
diet. 

It can't be your normal diet. 

QUESTION : \Vere you right or wrong? 

PRIME MINISTER : I didn't like doing it. 
I said so at that moment. But 
I do think that if we had not done anything then, whether in that shape or 
in any other shape, our democracy would not have survived. 

QUESTION : Are you an authoritarian personality? 

PRIME MINISTER : Not at all. 
lYiy strength is because people feel close to 
me. The people feel I listen to them. Now; an authoritarian person could 
not do that. 

. t . 

INTERNATIONAL A.FFAlRS 

QUESTlON : Mahatma Gandhi once claimed that some personal rights have 
to be kept in abeyance for the human rights of the nation. 
Is that a view 
you share? 

PRIME MINJ:STER : Yes. But you see it is like this: I can do what I like but 
surely I don't have the right to do something that is going to harm you. 
I cannot harm your family or my neighbours or 
cannot commit murder. 
whatever. So, everybody has to have a certain sense of responsibility and 
think about how far he can go without impinging on the equal rights of the 
other person. 

QuEsnoN : Which personal rights do you believe need to be kept in abeyance 
for that broader national public interest? 

: \Vell, first, violence. You cannot be violent. And 
PR!ll/ill M{NISTER 
secopdly, in a country like India; I think you have to consider the rights 
.of the larger numl.Jer of peopie. Some people are getting richer, thanks 
to science and technology, because they have the know-how, they have the 
capital, they have the experience. We are not preventing them getting 
richer because we need to increase our industry and our food production, 
but we must balance that with special programmes for the more disadvantaged 
groups, the under-privileged, not only economically but even in the matter 
of social justice. There has been discrimination against certain people in 
our history. 
In .our Constitution, we have declared that there should be 
no discrimination of any kind. But social attitudes just don't change 
because you put something in a constitution. 
In that sense, I think those 
who have should try to understand the problems of those who don't have, 
not because government will interfere but because if they don't do that, 
then, there is fue danger of a revolution or something which cannot be 
managed. 

QUESTWN : There is a vigorous debate going on at the moment about what 
the concept of human rights and civil freedoms really means. Is it possible, 
do you think, to have full-scale freedom and civil rights outside the affluent 
countries, outside the developed world ? 

PRIME MINISTER : What do you mean by freedom? Freedom of expression? 

QUESTION : I mean total freedom of the Press, for example. 

PRIME MlNISTBR : We, in India, have total freedom of the Press. You have 
only to see our newspapers. Their concept of a free Press is to be anti-Indira 
Gandhi. If they use the word 'authoritarian', it doesn't mean anybody 
else; it just means one particular person. And we have allowed it. This 

is not a new thing. They did the same with my father. Some of them 
did it even against Mahatma Gandhi. 

QUESTION : But you have re-introduced the concept of preventive detention. 
You passed new anti-strike laws. Amnesty International recently expressed 
concern about the fact that several political prisoners have been awaiting 
trial for years. 
I wonder to what extent these factors indicate that you are 
moving back already to some of the conditions that pertained to 
the 
Emergency. 

PRIME MINISTER : No. The very basis of your question is entirely wrong. 
First, we do not have political prisoners. 

QUESTION : So, was·the Amnesty International wrong in its report on that? 

PRIME i\1IN1STER : On political prisoners, yes. We had . some . political 
prisoners during Emergency. And the original int.ention was to keep them 
there only for a month or so. · Unfort1.inately, it continued. The Press, 
as I have said, is entirely free. We do have a system of justice which is 
unjust, if I can put it that way, because there are enormous delays. A lot 
of people write to me that they have been undertrial prisoners for years and 
years. All we can do is to refer their cases to the courts and say please 
hurry up. But we cannot interfere in the matter. 

QUESTlON 
anti-strike laws. 

: I talked about preventive detention. · I talked about new 

PRI~E MINISTER : Oh! The anti-strike laws? 1 must tell you that they 
are=not anti-strike. They are only anti-strike in essential services-ports 
and docks, 
railways, posts and telegraphs. And we have not used them 
at all. We have just kept them because we hao some information that some 
people wanted to paralyse these services at a moment of grave econon1ic 
difficulties. But, fortunately, our Indian workers are responsible. They 
do realize this, and we do have arrangements that if they have a grievance 
or a difficulty, it can be talked over, negotiated and an agreement reached. 
So, it is not that we are at a dead end. The unfortunate thing is that 
politicians use the workers for their own purposes, without considering 
whether it is in the workers' interest or not. We have leaders of unions 
'ivho are not themselves workers or have anything to do with that particular 
industry or service. 

QUESTION : Let me ask you: in what circumstances would you swing back 
to the more authoritarian, more repressive form of government that you 
adopted during the Emergency? 

INTERNATIONAL AJ:FAIRS 

PRilvIE :tvIINISTER : In no circumstances. But I would like to draw your 
attention to something else. We called it Emergency because we found that 
that was the only thing permissible under our Constitution. This was the 
legal opinion given to us by our Law Minister and other important legal 
people in the Cabinet. The Janata Party did not declare an emergency; 
but there were political prisoners in their time. There were actions taken 
against workers. Land was taken back from those to whom we had given 
it. They stopped most of the programmes for the poor people, but we 
heard not a word about it in the Press. They had carried on a tremendous 
propaganda against family planning, for instance. And they said we were 
sterilizing everybody forcibly, and they offered a reward of Rs 5,000 to 
It is not a small amount for a poor person. Yet, 
Rs l 0,000 per person. 
It is our firm belief 
there were no takers. Nothing came out in the Press. 
and that of the people of India, because they wouldn't have brought me back 
otherwise, that the Janata had a far greater emergency without calling it so. 

QUESTION : You are probably the world's inostpowerful woman .. To what 
extent does that make you sympathetic to. the feminist cause? 

PRIME MINISTER : Again, l don't think I am at all powerful. Who do you 
I don't know what powers the Prime Minister. 
compare it (power) with? 
of Australia or of New Zealand have. But I do know that I don't have the 
powers that the British Prime .Minister or the French President or the 
United States President has. So these things are all relative. We have such 
a system of checks and balances that it really obstnrcts the work. The 
bureaucracy plays a very important role. 
\Ve have committees for 
everything. Every appointment goes through various committees and so 
on. Sometimes poor people come to me and point to an injustice, and say, 
I say, "I can't." You see, either the matter is in court 
"Put it right". 
and has to run its course, or it has to do with such and such Department 
to whom I refer it or I speak-to the Minister. Now, they can't understand 
it that in actual fact all these powers are very greatly limited. 

So far as women are concerned, this is a man-dominated society. All 
the rules, whether in amuent countries or in developing or underdeveloped 
countries, are man-made rules. All that women want is to be treated as 
equals. We don't want, at least I don't want, to imitate men in any way 
at all. All I want is that women being half the population, should have the 
same opportunities as men have of using their talents and their capabilities 
in the service of the people or in pursuing any career which they may want 
to. 

QuESTlON : l read a description of you somewhere as "the only real man 
in the Indian Government". You clearly .have not got where you have got 
by imitating men or attempting w ourstrip in their terin{ 

PRl;ME MINISTER : I think that is not a complimentary statement, if I may 
say so. It is derogatory to all women. I don't really know how to say where 
I have got. 
I said yesterday to a largely Indian audience that I did not opt 
for politics in the sense tha~ I didn't ever have a choice. I was born in a place, 
in a family and at a time when my whole world was the freedom struggle. 
I feel strongly that we have not completed our freedom. We are politically 
free. We are not the satellite of any country. We are making our 
judgements independently. We act according to our assessment of the 
situations and judgements. But we cannot say that the fruits of freedom 
are reaching out to all our people. And until we can do that, our freedom 
will not be complete. And until we can do that, I feel that my duty is to 
put all n1y strength in that cause. 

QUESTION : You have mentioned your family circumstances as part of the 
impetus for getting into politics. Your life in politics has taken many 
sharp turnings. How important is your family and their support in your . 
pursuit of yourpolitical career? . · 

PRIME IvIINISTER : I don't regard poiitics as a career. It is not a career for 
me. 
It is a service. And that is why it made no difference when I was out 
of power. My programme, my day, was exactly the same; in fact, even 
heavier. The difference was that instead of getting a police escort when I 
went out, young people of the region came out on their motor-cycles and 
formed the escort. 
I d.idn't have official heip in the sense of a secretariat but 
a number of people came and offered their services voluntarily, whether to 
type or to do anything eise. And I continued going to the people and doing 
what I would have done-my public speaking and other work-as I would· 
have done. The only thing of course was that I could not participate in 
governmental activities. Even there, I was invited by a 
number of 
Governments, but, because the so-called democratic Janata Party took 
away my passport;· I could not go to the various conferences to which I 
was invited. And, finally, when I was elected by a huge majority from a 
place called Chickmagalur in the South, they expelled me from Parliament. 
And I would like to say one thing, not out of bitterness but because it is 
so ridiculous that I think people should know. There were about 40 to 
50 cases against me all over the country, partly as an effort of character 
assassination and partly to humiliate me. One of the cases in a state called 
Manipur which is quite far from Delhi near the Burmese border, was for 
aiding and abetting in the theft of two chickens and six eggs! 

QUESTION : Can l take up the second part of my question? Many male 
politicians seem prepared to sacrifice their families on the altar of their 
I1ow important is your family in your pursuit __ of life 
political ambition 
in politics? 

!NTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS 

PRtME l'v1INISTER : l am deeply attached to my family. But, again, I really 
regard India as my family and they regard me so. 
In large parts of India 
[ am called mother. And I can honestly say that when I go out, my major 
concern is what I can do for these yo~ng people. And it is as much as for 
my own. 
In fact, I feel that mine are capable of standing on their feet 
whereas the others are not and, therefore, I owe a greater responsibility to 
them. As for my immediate family, we all live together in a very small 
house·-my son. daughters-in-law and grandchildren. 

QUESTION : I am not keen to trespass on your privacy but the death of 
your son, Sanjay, must have been a devastating personal blow. Did that 
in any way alter your approach to politics or your attitude to politics? 

It was a personal blow because apart from being an 
PRIME .MINISTER : No. 
intelligent, very active, energetic person, he was tremendous fun to have in 
the house. These things are part of life and they don't affect the mainstream 
or the main path which yotJ have to follow and the things which you ha,v.; .. 
to do. 

QUESTION : Your other son. Rajiv, has entered politics nO\v. Of course, 
you followed your own father into politics. Do you admit to any ambition 
to see your son lead India after you': 

PR.l'v!E .MINISTER : Look, I have no ambition myself to lead India and [ 
have no ambition for Rajiv. 
If there is any such thing as ambition, it is 
ambition for the country-that the country should achieve things and we 
should help in that achievement. And I certainly think that I have helped-
f don't think I am being immodest in saying so-whether it is food-production 
·-I don't mean that I have gone out and tilled the fields-we have made 
policies which enabled our farmers to make us self-sufficient in food. 
have followed a policy which has-enabled our scientists to go ahead and make 
remarkable contributions in our own country as well as in some of the affluent 
ones. I certainly would like my family to feel a part of that and do what 
they can even if it means personal sacrifice. 

QUESTI0"1 : But the people, who criticise you, attack you for what they 
regard as an attempt to perpetuate personal dynasty in politics. 

PRlMB MINISTER : I am not concerned with what they say. But Rajiv has 
got elected by a tremendous majority. Now, are we for democracy or do 
we say that it doesn't matter what the people think but it matters what the 
few Press people or some others think. 
'\Vhen Sanjay 
died, the people said, ",ve must have somebody from your family. We are 
not going to vote for anybody else." And I faced a similar situation. As 

\Vhat is democracy? 

I told you, I had fought an election from the South when I was not in 
Government. Then I was expelled and so I was no longer a Member of 
Parliament. And then came the 1980 elections. 
I had a choice: should 
I stand from the constitu~ncy in the South or from my old constituency in 
the North? And they both said, "No, you must stand from here". The 
South made it a North-South issue and said, "It means that you are not 
bothered about the South. You belong to North India, you care about 
North India", and so on. And my old constituency said that they did not 
want to defeat me really in 1977 and had proved it by electing all the five 
Assembly members of my Party exactly two and a half months after the 1977 
defeat. So, there was this tremendous thing. Finally, I decided I would 
stand from both and our Constitution allows a person to stand from two 
constituencies. But afterwards within 15 days one has to decide which one 
he or she is going to keep, and he and she has to resign from the other. So, 
I decided to keep the Southern one to help the greater feeling of integration. 
But the people of the other constituency were so angry that I had thousands 
of people coming to my house and saying, ''We are rio.t going to vote .for 
anybody. You have your election, weare just not going to vote''. And 
I said, "You just can't do that. You have to vote. You can't be unrepre-
sented." Then they said, "Well, you find a Nehru or a Gandhi, no third 
name". So, it is the people's thing, I mean that is the democratic thing. 
If the Party 
If the people do not want him to be there, he won't be there. 
doesn't want somebody as a leader, he won't be there. Why am I a leader? 
It is not just that they like my face or even because I have a particular name. 
The Party wants me as a leader because I can get them the votes. The day 
I can't get them the votes, they will not retain me; they will just throw me 
out. And that is democracy for me and for everybody else. 

QUESTION : You regularly preach the virtues of not taking sides jn the 
confrontations between the great powers. Can I ask you briefly how big 
a setbackto leaders of your persuasion has been the election of President 
Reagan? 

PRIME MrNtsTBR : I don't think that it is a setback at all. Frankly, we 
don't know yet what President Reagan is going to do. We don't like the 
growing confrontation between the two blocs. 

QUESTION : Would you concede that the pressure to take sides is mounting? 

PRIME MINlSTBR : Pressures have always been there. But today there is 
a counter-pressure, in every country, in every bloc. You see, when the 
Non-aligned Movement began, there were very definite blocs. There 
was the Western bloc and there was the Eastern bloc and they were pretty 
tightly sort of united. Todav that is not so. There is division of ·opinion 

.... r ... ,-.,.,; 

within the Western bloc. AUthe European countries are not going a hundred 
per cent with President Reagan, and all the other countries are not going 
a hundred per cent with the Soviet Union. And within each country 
also, thei."e is a peace movement. Earlier, the peace movement wa:s largely 
identified with the Soviet Union and the Eastern bloc, but today it isn't. 
It has cut across politics. 
It has brought in intellectuals and people of 
different persuasions. 

Good Neighbourliness 

YouR EXCELLENCY President Marcos, and his charming lady, Madame 
:Marcos, Your Excellencies, the Jvlinisters, Excellencies of diplomatic corps, 
and distinguished guests, after the enchanting evening which you have had, . 
[ don't know whether you are in a mood for speeclies .. 

We, in India, have a unique philosophy. 

Yesterday, we had a great festival calied the Dussehra. 

In our country, myths merge 
into modernity and dreams lead to reality. Long ago, I read somewhere 
that if you want to build castles in the air, that's aU right. That's where · 
they should be built. But then you must build a foundation to them and 
link them to the earth. And that is what we have been trying to do in India. 
It is the old 
story of the Ramayana which is re-enacted year after year as if it were 
something that has just happened. 
It is very real to the people of India. 
Above all, it symbolizes not just a story but the victory of good over evil. 
In a day or so, we have the Muslim festival of Id which is celebrated all 
over the world. And in a couple of months, as you all know, it will be 
C~ristmas. 

So, this is a time when we think of the past, we think of the present, 
and we try to think of the futurewith hope. There isn't much in the world 
which leads to hope when one sees the violence and the crime and the many 
other things which we had hoped, with increased knowledge, wisdom and 
capacity, the mankind would be able to overcome. But somehow, we have 
not been able to rise above all those other instincts, and violence does 
persist. 

I was asked by the Press just a day ago in Melbourne whether I am 
optimistic. 
In fact, they asked this question to all the leaders who were 
there. My reply was that nobody in politics could afford to be not 
optimistic. But apart from that, our great leader, Mahatma Gandhi, 

Speech iLt dinner hosted by the President of the -Philippines, Mr Ferdinand Marcos, 
lvfanih. October 8. 1981 

ahyays used to say that the strange thing in life is not that there is evil, but that 
in spite of the evil; good does persist. Not that there is falsehood, but 
in spite of falsehood, truth does persist. 

Aud, therefore, while mankind lives, we have to try for the good. 
We have to try for the right path. And, in India, this is what we are trying 
to do. Being human, we cannot always live to our high ideals. We make 
mistakes and we have shortcomings. But we are trying · to keep to the 
path which not only he but our very ancient sages laid out before us. 

I spoke earlier of our great epics. One, the Ramayana, the other 
the Mahabharata. They were written many years ago, thousands of years. 
In fact, they were not written. First, it was just oral transmission from 
generation to generation, and later on they were written. And even now the 
research is going on a little bit in India but, perhaps not so strangely, more · 
in places like Chicago~ West Germany, and places like that. But even 
in these ancient books the lesson was the unity of India. They tried to 
weave their: legends in such a way that the extreme East and the North and 
the West · and the .South were. part of one. · While People travelled . here 
and there, their stories get intermingled. 
It 
dates back to those very ancient days. We have many languages. They 
are not dialects. There are fourteen official languages, each with its own 
script, each with its very ancient literature. Apart from that, we have 
dialects. We have many races, all the hues and the colours of the human 
skin, and hair and eyes. We have all religions of the world. But none of 
t.hese has ever been a dividing factor. Ou the contrary, we have felt that 
this diversity is something that strengthens our unity. 

And that is why the concept of a united India is not a· new one. 

And this is why we believe in democracy too. Because in a country 
of this great diversity, this large size and population and, above all, of a 
people who, since times immemorial, have been taught to be individualistic, 
to try for their own salvation, you simply cannot put them in one mould. 
Each has to find its weight. We are trying to find the balance, that while 
you must do good to yourself, you must also do good to your neighbour 
and to society. Otherwise, you yourself cannot prosper. 

This is the message today which we and you, Mr. President, I think 
are trying to give to the world. We happen to belong to what they call the 
developing nations. And there is another section. Some have divided the 
world into many parts. The developed, affluent world, the poor world, the 
Arab world, and some other world. 
I have been brought up to believe in 
one world. 
I had the· great good fortune not only to be educated in different 
parts of India but in different parts of Europe and England. And so I was 
brought up to feel at home wherever I went, and to think of people not as 
different races, different colours, languages, religious but as human beings. 
I look at people as men and women, Many have the same problems, 
however rich they are or however poor they are. But many have their own 

[NTBRNAUONAL AFFAIRS 

individual problems; and many have group problems, ethnic problems 
as we, in India, are well aware of. 

We saw today a spectacle of beauty, of variety. And, in fact, since 
we have arrived here; we have been surrounded by warmth, by friendship 
and by beauty. The reception we got at the airport was one of the most 
impressive and warm-hearted that I have ever been accorded anywhere. 
Well, I will repeat what I said at the press conference in Melbourne, that 
I would not have opted for politics if I had the chance to do anything else. 
But whether it is faith or something else-I don't know what it is that moves 
these things-I was born in a family, in a house, in a place at a time when 
there just was no choice. 
It was in the middle of the independence struggle. 
There was no question of thinking of anything else, of doing anything else. 
We just had to put up all in that struggle. And then our leaders taught us 
that the end of the struggle was not that we should just remove the foreign · 
rulers and sit on various chairs ourselves, but to remove the evils which 
existed in the country. 

You, Mr; President, very kindly have mentioned the non-violence of 
our movement. .. It was· indeed a ·unique movement. Because Mahatma 
Gandhi described non-violence not merefy as not killing or hitting," but· 
non-violence in words, non-violence in thoughts .. We were told again and 
again that if you have bitterness and hatred in your heart, it doesn't matter 
if you don't raise your hands; you are a violent person. 

This is how our movement grew. And that is why 

in the middle 
of the movement, at its tensest moment, a Britisher, whether a soldier or 
a civilian or an ordinary person, could walk in the streets of India without 
having a hair touched. But some were killed because we did also have 
a terrorist movement over which we had no control, which we disapproved 
of. But, nevertheless, a few misguided people, very, very small, did exist, 
and they killed a couple of governors and others here and there. But the 
independence movement which won freedom for India, was a non~violent 
one. And that is why after independence, we had no difficulty in being 
friends with Britain. 
In fact, even during independence struggle, in my 
home we had British visitors. We had other foreign political peoples, 
scientists, artists, writers, every kind of person. So, this is the atmosphere 
in which I grew up and in which I learned to see the whole world. 

Today, the India which used to be described in the foreign Press as 
always holding a handout with a begging bowl, that India for many years 
now has been self-sufficient in food. That India has made significant progress 
in industry, not only spread it more but diversified it. 
I don't want to 
go into all these :figures which '. are terribly boring and especially after 
not the modest but the sumptuous meal which you have provided, Mr. 
President and Madame. But it is an India standing on her feet. We haven't 
reached where we want to·go. As I have often said, when we see how far 
we have come, it looks very far ahead. The poveriy, immediately after 

independence, or all the many problems, they are far from us, we rarely 
worry about them. But when we see where we want to go, then we feel 
we have only barely touched the fringe of the problem. But, perhaps, 
that is a part of life. But while we have been struggling, the old struggle 
and the new struggle, we have also been watching what has been happening 
in the Philippines. We have been watching it with 
interest and with 
admiration. We have seen your own dedication to the development of your 
country, to the bringing of a better life to your people. 

You are very fortunate in having somebody to help you, who is not 
only beautiful and charming, but who is equally dedicated to the cause, 
who has done a great deal for iVIanila and for women everywhere. 
I am not 
a feminist. Let me make this clear. But. I do like women and I enjoy 
being a woman. But I would much rather regard myself as a human being. 
And when they talk about women's lib, I am sorry to say I don't know 
enough about the women's lib as it is in Europe or in America. Because 
in India, our prol:Jlems are so common that we feel that ,;,;e should .fight 
· them or meet them shoulder to shoulder rather than having a new. argument 
·· between the men and the women. But I do feel that it is a man dominated 
society, and· that womeri should· be given a greater chance. Not to rule 
the man, although some say that they rule them from their homes anyway, 
not to imitate them or be like them, but to have the ability to be themselves, 
to be able to use their talents or their abilities in the service of their people 
in order to make not only better families, happier families, but a better 
society, a happier, healthier society. 

The President told me that there are more women in the Philippines 
than men. Now, we don't have that much. We have only half-and-half. 
But even ifwe have only half, and they are not interested in what is happening 
in the country, how can you go ahead? You simply can't. So, this is 
why it is important, like all other disadvantaged groups, women should have 
a chance to do what they want to do in the best manner that they can do 
it. Aud that the Philippines is doing it, is a very big credit to both of you. 
I don't want to take more of your time, but I do want to say that I 
have wanted to come here for a long time. And it has given me great 
pleasure that our relationship has improved and that there is scope for 
greater economic and other co-operation. 

I didn't want to go into political questions, but l want to make just 
one point, because a lot of publicity is made as if we are not truly 
non-aligned. 

Now, we are not pro any country or bloc and not against any country 
or bloc. We are pro-Indian. As r think that every country is. We 
are concerned with the lives of our people. But we feel that we cannot get 
on with the job unless certain international problems are solved. And that 
is why,- ·Mr. President, you and l are going all the way to Cancun. We 
don't know whether anything will come out of it or not. But we do ihink 

that any little chance or opportunity there is for a better understanding to 
get to know one another in a deeper way should be grasped. We don't 
think that today's world is not an interdependent world. Whether we like 
our neighbours or others is immaterial. We simply cannot change our 
geographical situation. A day may come in the future when our great great 
grandchildren may be able to say, "Well, we don't like this world. We are 
going to go and live in Venus or wherever can we". But those of us who 
are here and our children have no such chance. We are here. We have 
to live with our neighbours. We have to live with the other countries. And, 
if we have to live with them. we might as well live in peace, harmony, 
friendship and co-operation. 

Now, this is the message which India wants to give and I think that 
the Philippines wants to give. And I think this is the biggest, the strongest 
link between us. 

rvfr. President, may I thank you and· Madame with all my heart for 
·. the friendship which you have offered to us, for your gracious hospitality, 
·. for t_he · invitafion. which has enabled me to .come here and meet not only · 

the. two of you whom I have met before and was anxious to meet again, 
but to see the friendly· faces of the Filipin·o people. 

The word Filipino is almost synonymous with friendliness, with a kind 
of gaiety, joy and harmony. This is what we wish for tlie rest of the world. 
So, ladies and gentlemen, may I ask you to rise and lift your glasses to 
the good health, to the personal happiness and welfare of His Excellency 
President l'vlarcos of the Philippines, to 
lvfarcos. and to . the 
prosperity of the people of the Philippines. 

l'viadame 

Common Commitment to Peace 

IT IS FOURTEEN years almost to th~ day since my last visit to Romania. 

am delighted to have this opportunity of renewing India's friendship 
with a dynamic country, and to exchange views with a statesman who is 
known for the force of his personality. Mr. President, your contribution 
to the industrial growth of Romania and to international co-operation is. 
widely acknowledged. We admire the achievements of the Romanian 
people and the advance made under your leadership. 

In ancient times, we have had trade contacts between India and Romania, 
and some of the main routes from India across Western Asia ran through 

Speech at banquet hosted by the President of Romania, Mr Nicolae Ceausescu, Bucharest, 
October 18, 1981 

Romania to other parts of Europe. 
I am told that one of your mountain 
passes is called the Oriental Gate. There is a kinship between our languages. 
In recent times, we have renewed these contacts and worked consistently 
to strengthen our bilateral relations,. We look back with satisfaction and 
appreciation on the technological help we have received from Romania, 
especially in oil and coal. The refineries of Gauhati and Haldia and the 
present fruitful collaboration at Kudremukh are examples of our bilateral 
co-operation which we hope to expand in other areas. 

Our domestic concerns and our political systems may not be similar, 
but we do share a common commitment to peace, and to the right of 
countries to develop in the manner they choose without interference from 
any quarter. Peace is no longer an alternative, it is an imperative. . Lasting 
security lies not in armaments but in dialogue and mutual understanding. 

Old problems persist and new ones have emerged, posing danger to 
the world as a whole, bu:t especially to Asia and our neighbourhood. In 
assessing their strategic objectives,. some. powers are pursuing short-term 

· and short-sighted policies~ .. The process of regional dialogue and concilia-

tion is thwarted, apart froin the fact that the people of the region are not 
benefited. We do not believe in power vacuums which must be filled by one 
or other outside power. We feel that non-alignment and the recognized 
principles of peaceful coexistence serve India and humankind better than 
theories of competitive deterrence. 

We, in India, are involved in the gigantic task of improving the lives 
of our people. Peace is a necessary condition for any economic development 
and peace depends on finding political solutions to the most complex 
problems. 
I need not recount the gains we have made in our fight for 
technological self-reliance, or how we have been affected by the steep increase 
in the cost of oil imports, or the special problems we l,lad to en~ounter when, 
for a few years,the country was led away from our chosen path of economic 
development. 

Food, energy and financial flows are the major economic problems of 
developing countries-and theseare subjects of discussions in the forthcoming 
meeting in Mexico. 
In food, the strategy of increased production through 
the widest possible participation of rural people and the application 
of new technology has enabled us to overcome shortages. But as a 
developed-cum-developing country, our energy requirements and financial 
needs are enormous: 

Both our countries want a more equitable international order. Our 
bilateral economic and commercial relations are in tune with this larger 
outlook. Greater trade between developed_ and developing, and greater 
economic co-operation even among developing countries,· _will help all 
countries mitigate the hardships caused by the global economic crisis. 

We live in an interdependent world. 

India's ancient~ philosophy 
recognizes the unity of all forms of life and even of non-life. Tolerance 

and acceptance have been the secret of the survival of our civilization. Even 
during our fight for national independence, Mahatma Gandhi and Jawaharlal 
Nehru taught us to view nationalism in the context of a harmonious inter-
nationalism. So, we have pursued friendship with all countries, irrespective 
of their political persuasions. Above all, ideology is the service of the human 
being. 

My delegation and I thank you for the warm welcome that has been 
accorded to us. On behalf of the Government and people of India, I wish 
Your Excellencies and, through you, the people of Romania happiness and 
prosperity in the years to come. 

Co-operation for Global Progress 
. Ir TSH~'DEED a privilege to form part of this disti;1gui~hed group .. .lvlexican 
hospitality is proverbial. The beauty and harmony of surroundings are 
an added bonus to create the proper atmosphere. 
I thank you sincerely, 
:Mr President, for your warm reception and the personal consideration 
given to our well-being. But, above all, I thank you for the initiative which 
you and Chancellor Kreisky have taken in bringing us all together. 

We 

greatly miss our absent friends, Chancellor Kreisky who 
persevered so much for so long for this meeting, and Chancellor Schmidt as 
· well as the Presidents of Brazil and the Ivory Coast. I am sure I echo your 
sentiments in wishing them speedy and complete recovery. 

I welcome Mr Trudeau as co-chairman not only because of his known 
competence in such a role but because of the specfal concern he has shown 
in the matters under discussion. 

Around the table here we have different points of view, coming as we 
do from various parts of the globe and entirely disparate circumstances. 
Some are old friends. We now have the opportunity of getting acquainted 
with others. All, I believe, are committed to a better future. 

We represent our own nations and peoples. 

I do not claim to speak 
for others. 
I speak for the ideals for which India has straggled, for the cause 
of peace, the cause ofa more egalitarian society, for the easing of the burdens 
of underprivileged · sections and underdeveloped countries. Here, in 
Cancun, we have come to try for understanding and, if it is possible, our 
attention should be devoted to finding ways of co-operation between developed 
and developing countries. 

Speech at the Conference on International Co-operation for Development, Cancun • Mexico' 
October 22, 1981 

Thoughtful contributions have been made to the problems which 
we all face. Obviously, there are differences _of approach and of emphasis. 
I hope that in such a gathering the spirit of conciliation will prevail and will 
enable us to reach a mutually satisfactory consensus. 

Way back in 1955, my father spoke of the interdependence of continents 
and of our desire to be friends with, and to co-operate with, Europe and 
America along with others. Friendship cannot be meaningful without 
equality. 
I believe this is the mood today all over the world-in Africa, 
in Asia and in Latin America. There has always been interdependence 
of some kind, but today it is between nations who are politically independent, 
conscious of their rights and of their legitin1ate place in the international 
community. The advance of technology, transport and communications 
has made such interdependence more relevant and even inescapable. 

Development cannot be imported, nor can it conform to a given pattern. 
· It has to come through our own determined efforts, tailored to our peculiar 
conditio·ns and ethos. We, the developing countries, are working 
for 
economic co~operation amongst ourselves· and for collective self-reliance. 
But we can~1ot avoid being affected:adversely by outside events. This calls 
for international understanding and structural adjustments in the world 
economy itself. That is why we are meeting for a dialogue on major issues 
of international co-operation for development. 

Some of the issues before us are highly technical, and we are not a body 
of experts. 
In many areas there are differences of perception as well as of 
interest which will need negotiation, and we are not a negotiating forum. 
Perhaps, all we can do is to agree to discuss them and to assure who are not 
present, but are equally concerned, that there will emerge from this meeting 
political support for early resumption of negotiations on a global basis 
after due preparations. 

In other forums, we have discussed how vital it is to increase levels of 
production in poorer countries, and to accelerate their rates of growth. Trade 
and financial flows are the only means of rectifying existing imbalances in 
· the global economy. 
It is tragic that in an age of growing knowledge and 
capacity, income disparities between developed and developing countries 
are widening, and vast numbers in some countries are denied their basic 
needs. 

We are told that the world economy is in a bad shape, that even the 
most prosperous of nations have inflation and unemployment, and suffer 
from recessionary conditions and a slowing down of growth. Half a century 
somewhat similar 
ago, industrialized nations 
predicament. Their attempt to solve these problems by 
inward-looking 
policies and througlt protectionism, preferential blocs, currency depreciation 
and similar devices plunged the world in the worst ever depression, 
culminating in World War IL 

found themselves in a 

Productive capacity has grown tremendously since then. So have 
It is just not possible for the international community 
human problems, 
to contain the prevailing levels of inequality and poverty which threaten 
peace and stability, in which we all have a stake. 

I think you will agree that the contribution of science and-technology 
to human welfare would be more significant if scientific resear~h were not 
misdirected and scarce raw materials diverted to military purposes. 

The complex problems of developed as well as developing countries 
can· be solved better by co-operation than confrontation. We all stand to 
benefit from the prosperity of our 
in 
industrialized economies lowers the export earnings of developing countries. 
A rise in income levels of developing countries generates growth in developed 
countries, increasing their exports and creating employment. 

trading partners. Stagnation 

Global negotiations·do have urgency. We are not wedded to certain 
phrases. We are more interested in the results and the substance. While 
preparing for them, other pressing problems brook no delay. 
Problems 
·· have been identified and solutions suggested. 
In its proposals for a summit, 
. the. Brandt Commission urged world· leaders to address themselves to · an 
emergency programme to deal with the problems of food, energy and financial 
flows. 

Freedom from hunger must be at the top of our priorities. Millions of 
people remain under-nourished and cannot afford the food 
they need. 
Without purchasing power they are ignored by the market forces which are 
supposed to balance demand and supply. Outlines of a food 
security 
programme-have been drawn up. The storing of emergency reserves is an 
essential measure. 

In the long run, world food production must be augmented. The 
developing countries have a potential for doing so. But their productivity 
is low an~ irrigation woefully inadequate. The supply of fertilizers, better 
techniques and improved seeds can lead to what in India has come to be 
known as the Green Revolution. But the efforts tQ.raise output needs the 
support of an inflow of resources from those countries which can provide 
finance, technology and other inputs. 

Successive adjustments of oil prices, which has a rationale for historic 
reasons, have nevertheless seriously worsened the balance of payments 
position of oil importing developing countries. By cutting back on imports, 
they will not attain their targets of growth, thus causing an overall decline in 
world trade. Should there not be a determined effort to help them to tide 
over the crisis? Developing countries also have possibilities for new energy 
resources. There is increasing consensus for an energy affiliate. Call it 
what you will, additional resources should be found for this purpose. 

Whether we focus on food or on energy or survey the problems of 
development as a whole, it is crucial for developing countries to have 
increased financial flows. The deficits in balance of payments and 
the 

resources wanted for development are enormous. There are warnings of 
disaster if resources are denied. Bilaterally and through 
international 
financial institutions, official development assistance has been extended to 
developing countries. At different times and in .various forums, the need 
for increased assistance has been acknowledged. We hope the expectations 
aroused will not be belied. 

India is no longer among the weakest or poorest nations. 

It has been 
able to move out of that situation only through the most strenuous efforts 
at development and by increasing agricultural production, so that we are 
now self-sufficient in foodgrains and have helped our neighbours and other 
countries. We have also greatly augmented and diversified our industry. 
We can justly claim that we have made good and full use of aid and credit 
from outside, and have repaid our debts in full and on time. Today; the 
component of foreign credits is only nine per cent of the total resources 
· needed for our Sixth Plan for development. And this we have done in 
conditions · of democracy, of full freedon1 of the individual and the 
Pr~ss. · \Ve have reached a level when the help froin outside will make all the 
difference in terms of attaining the take-off stage in development. Far from 
being a burden, we can be a source of strength to others.· 

With the practical experience gained over the years, existing multilateral 
financial institutions can swing into action and produce more effective 
results at lower cost. However, we are perturbed at what seem like pressures 
which n1ight limit their eiiicacy. · We should like to see acceptance of the 
Melbourne Declaration that international institutions should rise above a 
particular ideology. 

Apparently, there is a belief that private capital flows can channel 
. resources to developing countries more effectively than multilateral public 
flows. 
· Private investment can be quite useful in certain areas. However, 
it is hardly likely to provide resources for long-term development which 
has large social benefits but low market profits. Nor can it help in alleviating 
the balance of payments problems of most developing countries. Each 
country's policy towards private foreign investments is entitled to respect. 
· In India, we have what is called a 'mixed' economy. There is considerable 
scope for the private sector. There is also an important role for the public 
or state sector. There is no conflict between the two. 

We, in the developing world, have a long, hard path to climb. We 
shall persevere in our struggle to build modern economies and to ensure 
higher standards of living to our people. 
International co-operation and 
the assistance of developed countries are pivotal in quickening this process. 
We are not supplicants, nor are we confrontationists. 
It is our experience 
that the interests of the developed and developing countries are so intertwined 
that we can all survive in harmony only in conditions of true interdependence. 
The mutuality of interest between different nations and peoples can be served 
only by the establishment of a new international economic order based on 

justice and equality. We earnestly seek a global compact which will ensure 
the development of the poorer countries along with the prosperity of the 
developed nations, in circumstances of international peace and security. 

Seldom has a gathering ·attracted such attention or raised such hopes. 
Yet we have come with some apprehension regarding the outcome of our 
meeting. We cannot afford to be defeatist. The goodwill we witnessed 
yesterday in various informal gatherings and in this n.1orning's speeches is 
a sign of hope. The mind has to put aside the fragmentary utilitarian 
approach, and to look anew at the earth, the matrix of human heritage. Its 
problems are global and have to be so viewed. This is possible only when 
man symbolically opens his hand in a gesture of fearlessness and sharing. 
The leaf bud that cleaves the earth is tender. There is fragility 
in all 
beginnings. Yet a beginning has to be made. Let us at least initiate a 
process of action. 

Outcome of the Cancun Conference 

PRIME MINISTER : When I left for the Cancun Conference I did not have 
any great expectations about its outcome and what we were hoping for was 
that the door which seemed to be closing would not close but would open. 
I think we have been able to keep the door open. How far the countries of 
the world can go through the door and along that path, only the future can 
tell. 

The main issue don1inating our discussions at Cancun was the future of 
global negotiations. These have been going on for quite some time at the 
United Nations, but have been stalled there on basic issues of agenda and 
procedure, not on the.substance. Now, in Cancun, the heads of State and 
Government confirmed a consensus to launch 
the negotiations. Even 
though the issues of agenda and procedure are yet to be-agreed upon, I think, 
this is a step forward. The emphasis is on a sense of urgency and trying to 
go ahead with it much faster. As you have probably heard, these were the 
words put in at India's initiative. 

Earlier, the question of global negotiations was bothering most of the 
developing countries and with the best will in the world they would take 
time. 
In the meanwhile there were and there are problems of great urgency, 
especially to what are called the Least Developed Countries, the poorest 
countries. Obviously, when we go to a conference like this, where there is 
a limited number of people, we cannot speak about only our problems. We 

From the press conference at Palam Airport, New Delhi, October 27, 1981 

have to think of those who are not represented so that they don't get a 
feeling that we ignored their needs or that their voice was not heard . 

. Two proplems, food security and agricultural production, took the whole 
of the first session. On 
this issue, Cancun reached the maximum 
consensus because there was no question of two opinions or shades of 
opinion. The main conclusions were: eradication of hunger was an 
obligation of the 
international community; second, an international 
assurance was given for increasing food self-sufficiency. The importance 
of population control was recognized and it was decided to have task forces 
to assist agricultural programmes in developing countries which needed this 
type of help or which asked for them. This was in the morning session, 
apart from very brief opening statements. 

In the afternoon, we took up commodities, trade and industrialization, 
and here again there was support for international commodity agreement 
and elimination of protectionist measures. This is one point which, as you 
know, has been bothering us also a great deal along with other countries .. 

· Another major issue .was energy; and the m.ain ~c)lieyement on this 
issue was support for expanded energy lending by the World Bank. · · As 
you know, several countries did not approve of having· a separate· energy 
affiliate. Some, on the other hand, were very keen on it. Our position was 
that we are not concerned with words or phrases but the substance of what 
was going to be done. So, we feel that it is good that this idea was generally 
endorsed, although the word 'affiliate' did not come 
in. What was 
accepted was that all the developing countries wanted that extra resources 
should be made available for this programme. 

It is vital. 

Then there was discussion on monetary and financial issues. 

India 
emphasised these points: first, the need for enlarged n1ultilateral financial 
resources; second, the role of private capital. Well, as you know, 
the 
point has been made again and again that we should rely more on private 
capital than. help from Government and also that within a country perhaps 
the private sector should be helped more. Our view is that we don't shut 
off private capital. 
It Cil.n and sometimes did play a useful role. 
At the same time, we feel that it is too costly in the sense that most private 
investors are not interested in those areas which we need for the development 
of infrastructure or which do not yield quick profits. Now, every developing 
country has to encourage investment in production of consumer goods which 
do give immediate profit, but there are basic things which have to be done 
even if there is loss. And this is the difficulty. We have nothing against 
private capital but it simply cannot take the place of other types of help, 
multilateral and bilateral. 

We felt that there should be an orderly replenishment of IDA at higher 
levels, the International Development Assistance. 
International financial 
institutions have done a good job by and large and now they haye a greater 
appreciation of the situation. Not only do they need greater funds to help, 

but, what is equally important, their decisions to assist any country should 
not be inffuenced by any particular ideology or any non-economic 
consideration. They should look at each programme or each demand 
from the viewpoint of the economic merits. 
I am saying this because it 
seems that there is some effort at bringing in these extraneous matters. 
There is also the need to reform some of these international financial 
institutions aiid this should be a continuous process, depending upon the 
situation in the world and in different countries. 

Now, there should be follow-up on these issues which received general 
endorsement at appropriate forums, that is, United Nations, IMF, World 
Bank, FAO, etc. All these organizations are concerned and the agencies of 
the United Nations have been doing excellent work in various areas. But 
people have to see where they have to be strengthened or where certain 
amount of change of attitude or procedure has to be effected. One 
important point which we have been making in every forum is strengthening 
and rec-0gnition of the principle· of interdependence. And 1 think this 
·. was well recognized in the statement which was issued there. ·. But we.also . 
recognized that interdependence nius.t be on the basis of equality artd on 
strength and stability within each country. · Interdependence d·oesn't 
mean that any country is totally dependent on others. Each country must 
work towards self-reliance. Buf in today's world- and perhaps at no time 
was there total independence in that sense-as you know that many of those 
countri.es which are today highly industrialized, built their industry by 
dependence on our raw materials. By 'our' I mean not only India but ail 
the countries which were under the colonial powers. 

Today's interdependence is of a different kind. It is not of that sort, 
but it is of independent countries giving and taking help from one another. 
The industrialized affluent countries, however rich they are, too need our raw 
materials. They need other types of goods from other countries; just as we 
need help. 
I think it is an American journal, I don't remember which one, 
which had the phrase, that assistance to developing countries is productive 
investment. This is the point which we tried to make there, that we are not 
asking for charity. Nor do we want any type of confrontation with anybody. 
But unless this principle, these basic ideas are accepted, tension is bound to 
grow. And one of the things which came out strongly there was that nobody 
wanted tension to grow, nobody wanted a confrontation. So, the 
Conference was held in an atmosphere of great goodwill. 

The Conference provided an opportunity of meeting old friends and of 
meeting several people whom I had not met before. In today's world, it is 
important to know the leaders of countries and to know their views. One 
reads about them but personal exchange is valuable in its own special way. 

important people, 
QuEsno~ : I am referring to your meeting with two 
Mr Reagan as well as the Chinese Prime !v[inister. Would you like to tell 

us whether our relations with America have now improved or the American 
attitude has softened towards India . and whether the border question is 
likely to be on the negotiating table with China? 

PRIME MINISTER : Well, I did not discuss any of these matters. 
J\1y call on 
President Reagan was just to get to know him a little better. We talked · 
mostly about general issues, something to do with the Cancun Conference 
and tension in the neighbourhood. I did not refer to any specific matter. 
However, while I was meeting the President separately, our officials met 
their officials and they discussed a number of matters with them. When the 
President and I joined them, they raised the question of Indian agriculture-
whether we could help, or somebody else could help, other countries to make 
similar progress. So, it was more of a general conversation. This is true 
also of my meeting with the Chinese Premier. 
In both meetings, we 
emphasised the need for better relationship and closer co-operation, l;>ut 
mostly I did not discuss bilateral matters .. Nor was there time. to do so. 
\Vehad extremely little time for these separate meetings. 

QUESTION : Madam Prime Minister, during your absence, there has been a· 
very interesting development in our region. Our immediate neighbour, 
President Zia-ul-Haq, has repeatedly been saying. that he wants a No-War 
Pact with India. And in your absence, according to news reports, he said 
that he would like to send it in writing to you. Would you comment on 
that? 

PRIME MINISTER : It makes no difference "".hether it is in writing or in words. 
We are the ones who proposed a No-War Pact in 1949. 
\Ve did not let the 
It has been repeated time and again by every succeeding 
matter rest there. 
Prime Minister. We have made it clear in every possible way that India 
wants to live at peace with Pakistan. 
those specific words 
"No-War Pact" were used in my father's time and Pakistan rejected them ' 
outright. Afterwards, when I was talking with Mr Bhutto and when we 
came to an agreement that there should be better relations, they said : "Please 
do not mention these words". 
I don't think he said that they are allergic but 
he said something to the effect that it is better to avoid them now. We 
said we were not wedded to words, and this was what we wanted and at 
that time we came to the decision that we should create an atmosphere of 
goodwill which would lead up to this. And, since it was our offer and we 
have never changed it since then, we are committed to that. 

think 

But what we are intrigued about is why these words should be used by 

President Zia at this particular time when ,they are going all out with anti-
India propaganda and raising bilateral issues. They speak of the Simla 
spirit, but the main thing agreed on in Simla was that bilateral issues would 
not be raised internationally; we would· discuss_ them among ourselves, and 

INTERNATIONAL AFFAJRS 

if a general goodwill was established, we felt that there would be no difficulty 
in solving the bilateral problems. You can't have two parallel things; you 
prepare for war and. you say we would like to have a No-War Pact. 

QUESTION : Would you kindly ask for a further elucidation on this point? 

PRIME MINISTER : I asked for it the very first time I heard it. 
I said I don't 
know what exactly it meant. But elucidation can't come through words 
but through action and attitude. 

QUESTION : Madam Prime Minister, going back to Cancun, you said that 
this is your impression that the door is open and perhaps other nations will 
go forward in that direction. 
Is that the impression that you had about 
others, because we read about other leaders having a different assessment? 
By and large, would you say this is the assessment others also have? 

PRIME MINISTER : No; how c~n I speak:Jor others?. Different leaders have· 
made their own statements. Things ar.e relative. 
If you went with an . 
expectation· that there would be immediate movement and immediately 
programmes would be taken up, then of course you would be very greatly 
disappointed. Therefore, several people were disappointed. 
I went with 
no expectations. So, the very fact that door has not been closed and there 
is now greater understanding of the problem, is something. Now, whether 
the people will act on that understanding or relate it to what they consider 
their interests. is difficult to say. Our whole point there and elsewhere is 
that these are inter conn~cted matters, that increasing disparities between 
the countries are' as great a cause of tension and 
likely confrontation 
as the. growth of armament. And we made that clear. So, what your 
assessment is depends upon your expectations. 

QUESTION : While you were away, Dr Subramaniam Swamyissued a statement 
in which he said so many things.al:>out the proposed agreement to buy 
7'.1irage-2000. 
In the statement, he said that you should not sign any 
agreement unless Parliament had been taken into confidence. 

PRIME MTNISTER : What do you expect me to say? Does Parliament go 
into such agreements in our country ever? 

QUESTION : You said earlier that Pakistan can't have two parallel things-
make preparations for war and talk of No-War Pact. Are you saying that 
they are arming themselves for that purpose, for a war ... ? 

PRIME MtNTSTER : Obviously, I am not saying anything new. What 1 have 
said before is that they are acquiring weaponry in quantity and in quality, 

in sophistication, which is far above the needs of the size of the country 
and any danger that can be posed. Who are they going to fight? Are they 
going to fight Afghanistan? Are they going to fight the Soviet Union? 
So, from whom is the danger? 
In all these years since independence, it 
is we who have been attacked by Pakistan. India has never, not once, either 
before or after independence, waged a war against another country. 

I am concerned about who can do 

Replying to a question regarding the follow-up of the Cancun decisions 
and specialized agencies of UN, the Prime Minister said: "I am not concerned 
it most 
with political pressures. 
competently. Even if all the discussions take place at the United Nations, 
ultimately somebody will have to follow them up. UN itself cannot take 
up the food problem and energy problem and all that in great detail. Such 
detailed discussions will have to be in the forum of the specialized agencies. 
So. it is not that you are for or against any specialized agencies. You 
have to find what is the least costly, most efficient way of dealing with 
questforis arid I don't think th.a:t any country wanted to bypass these bodies. · 
. All they felt was that sometimes in these bodies the voice of.a few. is. more 
strongly i'epresented than the others. Now, we agreed that this other point 
of view should be not only represented but heeded and acted upon. 

QuESTWN : The developing countries want new trade relations, new economic 
order. They think UNCTAD is the forum where these further global 
negotiations could be held instead of setting up a new agency. 

PIUME l\1INISTER : I think I answered this in reply to a previous question. 
In some of these bodies, the voices of developed countries play a stronger 
role. Therefore, a larger number of developing countries feel that their 
point of view is not listened to. Basically, nobody is against these agencies-. 
but they feel that there should be a certain reform, so that their needs, their: 
demands are met. 

QUESTlON : I don't know on what basis you have said that at Cancun most 
of our demands have been met. Your demand for energy affiliate, your 
demand for replenishment of IDA resources, your demand for technology 
transfer-none of these was met. You talked about most of us not having 
even boots. 
I also watched your 
I just can't understand on what basis the least 
press conference there. 
developed countries, the Third World, 
the poor countries base their 
optimism on the generosity of the rich countries? 

I have been reading press reports here. 

PRIME MINISTER : No, l did not say that they were optimistic on these matters. 
What I said was that we met there at least When we left here, the mood 
p-revailing was of pessimism. 
In fact, when we left Melbourne, people 
were very pessimistic about Cancun and ihey were seriously wondering 

whether any agreement would be reached. This was reached on the basis 
that these things need to be done which was not acknowledged earlier. That 
is a step forward. 

It is not a leap forward, but it is a step forward. 

QUESTION : Have you been trying to think about India's problems while 
you have been away? 

PR!ME MINISTER : What else do you think I was doing at Cancun? I was 
putting India's problems in front of the world community about our 
achievements with which we can help other countries who need our help, 
and also the problems on which we need other people's help. Naturally, 
otherwise there would be no point in going there. 

Tests of Foreign Policy 

IT IS A pieasure to participate in the silver jubilee celebrations of the School 
of International Studies, especially because of its association with my father 
and with Pandit Kunzru. Both believed that public life should be permeated 
by the spirit of service, and by knowledge and continuous study. 
I am glad 
that Dr Appadorai's services are being recognized. He is a pioneer of 
international studies and a scholar reputed for his integrity. This is a tribute 
he richly deserves. 

Diplomacy and the conduct of foreign affairs are generally thought 
to require a certain shrewdness. Perhaps this is important. ·:Machiavelli 
and Chanakya certainly thought so. But more important are the larger 
perspective ·and far-sighted visio,n. The object of establishing this School 
was to enhance the intellectual input in the making of our foreign policy. 

A country's foreign policy is-shaped by many forces. 

Its position 
on the map and the countries which are its neighbours, the policies they 
adopt and the actions they take; also, its historical experiences in the aggre-
gate and in terms of its particular successes or traumas. For instance, a 
nation which has suffered colonialism cannot but adopt a particular stance . 
on questions affecting national independence. A nation which had to 
struggle and sacrifice for its freedom has a different attitude to hegemony 
than those which became sovereign the easy way. A nation which has been 
frequently subjected to invasions has to be specially careful about its security. 
Other determining factors are the country's size and the kind of society 

Inaugural speech at the silver jubilee celebrations of the School of International Studies 
of the Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, Oi;tober 30, 1981 

it has, the pattern of its natural resources, the level of its own technological 
development and the nature of its econo,mic needs. 

Foreign policy cannot be very different from domestic aspirations and 
policies. The very concept of nationhood is of fairly recent origin. Modern 
nationalism arose in Europe and America a few centuries ago. Elsewhere 
it developed in the present- century. · Many nations are breakaway parts 
of old empires. Some have grown from the coming together of tribes and 
regions. A common religion or a common language is often regarded as 
prerequisite of nationhood. Yet we know that reiigious or linguistic uni-
formity is no more essential for national cohesion than ethnic homogeneity. 
We see that nations with great diversity can be as strong and can be imbued 
with as keen a sense of national purpose as those with one religion, one 
language or one race. 

One of the most fascinating riddles of history is what makes a group 
of people share a sense of common destiny. Almost. always this is the 
result of being together. in ·hardship .and humiliatiori.; often it comes from 
· being summoned to a heroic effort by a great Jigure or gro11p . of people . 
who inspire them with a vision of truth or glory. Such men are acclaimed 
as founding fathers.-

Our struggle for freedom was itself a process of nation-building. 

It 
· took long and was exceptionally harrowing, though often exhilarating. How 
well I remember the moments of uplift when hardship seemed so small 
a price for such a glorious cause. The thought of freedom lured us on, 
as does a bright light at the end of a dark tunneL So long as I know I was 
a participant in that great endeavour, it did not matter that I might not live 
to see freedom. But many were the moments of gloom when it seemed that 
the movement was flagging. 
In retrospect, perhaps it was a blessing that 
our struggle was long drawn out, for this enabled our leaders to weigh 
It gave our freedom movement a:mass bas·e as no other such 
and to plan. 
movement has had. Under the exacting apprenticeship to Mahatma Gandhi 
who haci his finger on the pulse of the people, Jawaharlal Nehru evolved our 
national philosophy of democracy, non-sectarian tolerance in religion, 
social and economic justice and a spirit of independence in foreign relations. 
Seldom was a movement so conscious of its international context and 
significance. In the early thirties, Harindranath Chattopadhyaya expressed 
the national sentiment in these words: "Let us shout from tower and steeple, 
now our banner is unfurled. That by :fighting for our people, we are fighting 
for the world". We kept close touch with others with similar aims and with 
elements in Europe and America who championed human dignity. We 
saw with clarity the divergence between the professions and practice of most 
governments of the dominant powers of the day. Some of you may 
remember how curtly we were informed that the freedoms promised under 
the Atlantic Charter did not apply to the people of India Qr of other parts 
of Asia and Africa. From such experience was born the concept of 

non-alignment, the logical continuation of the spirit of non-cooperation 
with colonialism. 

The main critics of Jawaharlal Nehru's foreign policy were those who 
did not understand the indivisibility of freedom, or the urgency of economic 
and social reform; and, of course, some who had remained aloof from the 
mainstream of national thinking. There were also those who were more 
preoccupied with the ideological struggle between world capitalism and world 
communism than with our own nation-building. The forthrightness with 
which we spoke out on world affairs, consolidated our own feeling of national 
identity. Alignment might bring more aid but it does not strengthen the 
self-reliant foundations of freedom. Also, it inhibits people from making 
their own economic decisions. Hence non-alignment helped us to become 
more technologically self-reliant. 

Non-alignment is a policy but not an objective by itself. The objective 
is freedom of judgment and of action so as to safeguard the nation's true 
. strength a,nd basic interests. Temporary additions to strength can sometimes 
compromise loilg-term security. Had we built our Defence Forces at the 
behe~t of others or through gifts of armaments, the centre of decision and 
policy-making would have moved out of our hands. There are instances 
when recipients of armaments do not confine themselves to serving the 
interests of the donors but use them for their own purposes. We ourselves 
have been victim to such diversion. 

Military alliances entail obligations that may not be entirely consistent 
with a nation's concerns. Hence many countries, even within such alliances, 
are now somewhat restive and apprehensive about bases and the stationing 
of missiles. If not non-alignment, at least the independence of mind and 
action that it implies seems to b~ gaining an unsteady toe-hold within blocs. 
Nations cannot be classified aS: permane-nt enemies or permanent allies. 
So, while we deplore the return to cold war postures, we also note the hints 
o£reservations by the allies of the big powers about being pulled into crusades 
and grand designs. 

In the early years, we had ·neither the resources nor the desire to get 
entangled in the rivalries and conflicts of the blocs and their war preparations. 
The gigantic proportions of our problems needed our total attention. Only 
in conditions of peace could we concentrate on development. This 
consideration remains valid today. Whatever.the difficulties of self-reliance, 
and we should not underestimate them, still less can we afford dependence 
on others, either for development or defence. A small country could and 
India is far too vast 
some did achieve growth through large/scale aid. 
and its problems too massive to be bailed out by any other country. For 
us, self-reliant development is not merely desirable, it is the only possible 

Self-reliance. does not mean isolation or repudiation of co-operation 
in technological, economic, cultural and political matters. As I pointed 

out at the Cancun Conference, some kind of interdependence has always been 
there. Today, it must be in conditions of equality and self-respect and on 
the secure foundations of the independence of nations. 

I spoke earlier of the national climate that Mahatma Gandhi and 
Jawaharlal Nehru developed in favour of democracy, secularism, socialism 
and non-alignment. This was not without opposition which was constant 
and considerable. They had to fight every inch of the way. Gandhiji 
faced hostility from Sanatanists, from latter-day loyalists and from political 
radicals who regarded him as an apologist of the old order. Some of his 
own close associates also had reservations about his faith in our rural people. 
My father's economic and foreign policies were attacked by rightists and 
leftists alike. He was accused simultaneously of being a communist as 
well as an agent of international capitalism! Many newspapers were active 
adversaries. It is a measur_e of the historical correctness of Gandhiji and 
Nehru that those who criticized them 
in their lifetime now praise 
them. 

· I am recounting all this to emphasise that even when a policy is the right 
one and reflects the desire as well as the interests of the people, it may not· 
be acceptable to many political parties whose attitudes flow from their own 
ideological preoccupations. A policy should not be concerned with 
consensus among parties but with its relevence and correctness and acceptance 
by the people at large. 
It should be able to safeguard and promote the 
national interest while being in consonance with the larger principles of 
peace and justice. 
In fact, the reconciliation of strength and humaneness 
is the true test of any Government policies. 

In the absence of these, we tend to accept foreign interpreta-

Even when the direction is clear, foreign policy needs careful steering. 
because it is buffeted by the waves and winds from within and without. The 
framers of policy and their-executors and 
interpreters-the country's 
diplomatic service-=-need the benefit of continuous public debate. 
Parliament is important and the Press too has a special rol~: No less is 
the contribution of universities and the academic community. We require 
more specialization and more thoroughgoing multi-disciplinary area studies 
as well as specialized assessments of individual problems in foreign policy 
and security. 
tions and influences far too readily. Did not many people fall into the trap 
of theories in the early fifties projecting us as an alternative to China or 
later into the description of India as a major regional power? Since 
pleaders of special courses of action write with evangelical fervour, we are 
sometimes carried away by ideological rhetoric rather than by hard argument. 
The purpose of our centres of higher learning should be to strengthen our 
intellectual self-reliance. From the School of International Studies we 
expect books and studies which analyse world issues from the Indian point 
of view to train specialists who will win recognition and respect within the 
country and abroad. 

I have touched on the broad and more obvious aspects of foreign policy. 
But in today's world, the advance of science and technology plays a crucial 
role. 
I was just reading the words of a foreign TV commentator: "One of 
the most amazing factors when you lpok back at the history of technology 
is that the public in the late twentieth century had not a glimmering of what 
was really happening to them. The interesting question is whether the course 
of history would have been different if the public had been able to comprehend 
the journey on which they had embarked". 

My good wishes to your School on its completing 25 years. 

I have 

pleasure in inaugurating its silver jubilee celebrations. 

India and Italy 
MR PRIME MINISTER, I thank you for the warm reception accorded to me 

and my delegation, and for your kind words. 

I first came to Italy as a child and have had a few, though far too brief, 
opportunities to see some of your beautiful cities. And again accompanied 
my father when he was in Rome. But this, I believe, is the first official visit 
of an Indian Prime Minister. 

I feel privileged. 

Born and brought up as I was in the midst of struggle for independence, 
son1e of my first heroes, who had also inspired my father in his boyhood, 
included Garibaldi, Mazzini and Cavour. Later, when education widened 
my horizon, I came to admire the unmatched art of your great masters. For 
those who care for culture and beauty, Italy has been a magnet. 

Rome gave the world the concept of law and communication between 
centre and periphery. Much later arose Italy, bringing even greater gifts 
to the cumulative treasure of mankind. A writer of Italian origin has claimed: 
"Italians have impressively filled Europe and most of the world with the fame 
of their larger than life size famous men ... Their influence on architecture 
has been felt almost everywhere. 
Italians have discovered America for the 
Americans; taught poetry, statesmanship and ruses of trade to the English, 
military art to the Germans, cuisine to the French, acting and ballet dancing 
to the Russians, and music to everybody". 

Speech at banquet h_osted by the Prime Minister of Italy, Mr Giovanni Spadolini Rome, 
November 10, 1981 

In various old ports of India-and even in inland centres of trade; coins 
that 
from Rome are discovered regularly, testifying to the commerce 
Indian spices became a part of Roman history 
flourished between us. 
when in A.D. 408 three thousand pound$ of Indian pepper were part of the 
ransom paid by the Senate to Alaric the Goth to save Rome! 

In the last thirty years, we have watched your impressive economic 
growth. The co-operation between us has grown. Apart from the scope 
of increasing bilateral trade, there is a vast potential for joint collaboration 
in third countries. The Technical Cooperation Agreement signed by your 
distinguished Foreign Minister in New Delhi in February is a positive step. 
We hope that the Cultural Agreement and the Science and Technology 
Agreement between us will bring our two countries closer. 

There is need for greater trade between advanced countries as a whole 
and the developing countries. We appreciate the assistance Italy has given 
· us in the development of our industry.. The argument advanced by many 
affluent countries, which have erected trade barriers against imports .from 
· developing countries, · that such imports might create unemploym¢nt is .. 
belied by facts. · By buying more from developing countries, industrialized 
countries will be able to sell and produce more, apart from helping consumers · 
within their own countries. 
leaders of the North, as the affluent world is called, to have deeper under-
standing of this problem. At the same time, we fully realize the importance 
of developing countries making the maximum effort to reduce inequalities 
within their own societies, and to co-operate with one another to become 
more self-reliant, individually and collectively. 

I hope the recent meeting in Cancun has enabled 

Trade and economic relations can improve and the world economic 
crisis can be brought under control only when scarce resources are actually 
used for the welfare of the people and not diverted to destructive purposes. 
One of the prime causes of the present world crisis is that so much of the 
is spent on the production of unconsumable military 
world's income 
hardware which is becoming progressively more sophisticated and lethal. 
Escalating confrontation cannot but affect all parts of the world. Let us 
not make true on earth Dante's warning in hell : "All hope abandon, ye 
who enter here!" 

India sincerely desires harmony on our subcontinent. We want the 
Indian Ocean to be a zone of peace. 
Italy, I know, would like peace to 
prevail in Europe as well as other parts of the world. . It is time that 
governments recognized the deep feelings of insecurity and fear that grip 
peoples' minds, cutting across national borders and even political persuasions. 
Sooner or later, the will of democratic people for peace must reflect itself 
in actions of governments. 

_ Distinguished guests, I request you to raise your glasses to the good 
health and happiness of His Excellency President Sandro Pertini, to 

His Excellency Prime Minister Giovanni Spadolini, 
to the progress 
and prosperity of the Italian people · and to friendship between Italy and 
India. 

Relevance of Non-Aligned Movement 
THE NON-ALIGNED COMMUNITY consists mostly of countries which liberated 
themselves from colonialism and foreign domination. They stand for 
equality, they work for peace and they believe in a world order based on 
co-operation. 

Two notable international gatherings, the Asian Relations Conference; 
held in New Delhi in March 1947 at the initiative of Jawaharlal Nehru, 
and the Conference of Afro-Asian Nations in Bandung in 1955, proclaimed 
the determination of Asian and African countries to consolidate their 
independence and to pursue their own political, economic and social 
development. 

At their first triennial conference in Belgrade in 1961 under the 
presidentship of President Tito, the non-aligned countries reiterated their 
resolve to stay clear of military alliances and rededicated themselves to the 
goals of world peace. 

The membership of the Non-aligned Movement has increased nearly. 
fourfold. Since then, virtually every nation which attained independence 
during the past two decades has decided to follow the policy of non-alignment. 
This in itself is testimony to the validity and vitality of the policy of 
non-alignment. 

Our movement has consistently worked for the eradication of colonialism, 
racism and imperialist domination, We have supported liberation struggles 
all over the world and await the final victory of African peoples against 
apartheid and the success of the struggle of the Palestinian people. 

Peaceful coexistence is one of the first articles of the credo of non-

alignment. The elimination of nuclear weapons and of war is imperative 
if the people of the world can grow to their fullest stature. But 
the 
international situation is again deteriorating. Detente has had a setback 
in Europe, and there is open talk of resumption of nuclear race. Big power 
presences have increased in various parts of the world. Armed conflicts 

Message sent on January 19, 1981 to the special supplement of the Yugoslav daily 
Borba on the twentieth anniversary of the Belgrade Conference 

SBLECTBD SPEECHES AND WRITINGS OF INDIRA GANDHI 

have increased. These developments give special urgency to efforts to find 
peaceful resolution of tensions. Non-alignment thus assumes added 
relevance. 

The gn1wing disparity between rich and poor countries is another major 
source of conflict. The Non-aligned Movement has always encouraged 
greatc:;r economic co-operation. 
In this field too there is much work to do. 
It is India's privilege to host a meeting of the Foreign Ministers of 
non-aligned countries in New Delhi next month. 
I hope that every country 
will exert itself to the utmost to strengthen the unity and purpose of the 
non-aligned community. At this moment, we should recall and be inspired 
by the wisdom and vision of the great pioneers of our movement. 

Non-Alignment and Freedom 

TODAY \VB COULD well echo Mahatma Gandhi's words when ~e said, "IJ1dia · 
wants to be independent of everybody who wants to own this country. We 
do not want a change of masters. We want to be masters on our own soil". 
These words characterize the political foundation of non-alignment. All 
of us, coming from various continents, from Asia and Africa, from Europe 
It is to 
and the Americas, want to be masters of our soil and our future. 
this pursuit of freedom and peace, so essential for freedom, that I welcome 
you, the delegates, distinguished ministers and representatives of non-aligned 
countries. 

Here are assembled nearly a hundred nations. Each has its distinct 
personality, its own travails and triumphs. I welcome you to this conference 
and to India. Delhi has been witness to history dating back to our epics. 
It has been the citadel of empires and it has seen the fall of empires. To 
us, it symbolizes the will to freedom of resurgent India. 

With prescience of our common problems, we need to stand together. 
My father, Jawaharlal Nehru, convened an Asian Relations Conference in 
Delhi in March 1947 even before we, and the many others who attended 
with such enthusiasm, were free. 

On the historic and magic day when India's independence was proclaimed, 
my father declared that India looked at the world with clear and friendly 
eyes and would co-operate with all nations and peoples of the world in 
furthering peace, freedom and democracy. Since then we have worked 
consistently to democratize international relations, we have supported 

Inaugural speech at the Non-aligned Foreign Minister's Conft:lrence,. New Delhi, 
February 9, 1981 

lNTBRNAnONAL AFFAIRS 

liberation struggles, we have fought against all foreign domination and 
racism, and have pleaded the cause of coexistence and the peaceful resolution 
of conflicts. Peace is not that which teeters on the brink; that is the absence 
of war, yet it threatens war. Nor can peace be based on outmoded 
concepts of imperialism, military alliances, spheres of influence or balance 
of power and competition in nuclear and conventional terror. 

1\1r Chairman, many changes have occurred since the Non-aligned 
Summit was held in your brave and beautiful country eighteen months 
ago. We hear of a crisis of character, a crisis of civilization. What else 
can we expect when, having so recently seen the horror and heartbreak of 
war, countries still prepare for a new military confrontation? There is 
disquiet in Europe, gathering danger in Asia, and new pressures on Latin 
America and the Caribbeans. Non-aligned countries are being asked 
to stand up and be counted for or against one side or the other. We see the 
familiar efforts to tum one non-aligned country against another, to weaken 
our solidarity and to impair the cohesion of our movement. These are 
· backed by economic threats and blandishinents on the one hand and military 
might and bases on the other: 

The realities of the world 

situation-· the possibility of a nuclear 
Armageddon by a single lapse or rash act-reinforce the relevance of non-
alignment and demand a rededication to peace. From this conference should 
issue a call to the big powers to de-escalate belligerent rhetoric, to reduce 
presences in the Indian Ocean and in the various parts of Asia and Africa, 
and to resume the earnest search for understanding and peace. 

We are all deeply distressed at events in Afghanistan. The unhappy conflict 
in West Asia between two of our own brothers has had adverse consequences 
for the peoples of these two countries as welt as other non-aligned nations. 
These developments have given encouragement to forces which work against 
our movement and have increased the risk of intervention. Let us hope that 
big powers will not be tempted to take advantage to enlarge local disputes 
In the name of peace and the future of mankind, 
into wider confrontations. 
we plead with the combatants, and appeal to those who are waiting in the 
wings, to call their youngmen back to their homes. 

At this conference we must again raise our voices against the last bastions 
of colonialism and racism. We salute the victorious people of Zimbabwe 
and the brave freedom fighters of Namibia, South Africa and Palestine. 
We deplore the failure of the recent talks in Geneva and the manner in which 
the UN plan for the independence of Namibia is being frustrated by South 
Africa's obstructiveness. 

Experience has shown that political subjugation and economic exploita-

tion go hand in hand. So, through political freedom, we hoped to achieve 
economic advance. The economic dimension of the policy of non-alignment 
is no less important than the political. 
In Algiers, Colombo and Havana, 
the conferences articulated the economic content of non-alignment. Yet, 

for most of us, economic prospects have been worsening with each passing 
month. 
I strongly urge that global negotiations be undertaken without 
further delay to pave the way for a new international economic order. 

At the· same time we have our own responsibility, highlighted by the 
impasse in North-South negotiations, to reduce our vulnerability to the 
actions of developed countries. The Havana spirit urged collective self-
reliance. The main sanction of developing countries is in our solidarity. 
This solidarity must be built by a process of reconciliation and harmonization 
of our mutual interests. 

If protectionism-the classic weapon of the strong against the weak-is 
used against us, should we not expand trade amongst ourselves? If advanced 
technology and aid (and even food) are used as instruments of pressure, 
should we not devise and adopt comprehensive measures 
for mutually 
beneficial financial, technological and agricultural co-operation among our 
countries? Today our capabilities are diverse enough to permit meaningful 
· .transfer of technology, skills and. financial resources among ourselves. 

· Some affluent co:untries do recognize the interdependence of nations 
and. the need for co-operation. Hence, our negotiating positions should be 
formulated in a dynamic context and our energies c_oncentrated on map-
ping out our own strategy. 

At every meeting of the non-aligned, big powers seem to redouble their 
diplomatic and publicity campaign to sow suspicion and division within us. 
As free peoples we must stand together. Working in unison, on the basis 
of our original principles and purpose, will fortify us to withstand pressures. 
Divided we are vulnerable, united we can and shall prevail. Let this simple 
truth guide your deliberations in the next few days. Let us not fall prey 
to" suggestive propaganda. We are here not to juggle with words but to 
find a way to reinforce the authority and effectiveness of the Non-aligned 
Movement. 

Today, this day 

is regarded as an auspic~ous day in India: Vasant 
Panchami, the first day of spring and dedicated to learning and the, arts. 
It is a good day for a conference dev9ted to peace and harmony. 

On behalf of the Government and people of India, I greet you once 
again. Millions of eyes are focussed on this conference and millions of 
hearts wish you well. 

Non-Alignment and Peace 
I FEEL PRIVILEGED to speak on behalf of the 660 million people of India at 
this meeting to mark the 20th anniversary of the First Conference of 
Non-Aligned Nations, which was held in Belgrade. Even before that 
conference, nation after newly free nation had proclaimed its allegiance 
to and adoption of non-alignment. Close bonds of fellow feeling and 
common purpose had already been established among them. Belgrade 
represented a formal demonstration of a community of interest. 

Many more nations have joined our family. What is the spirit that 
moves us? The spirit of national freedom. What is the coi:nmon objective 
for which we work? Peace-which can be achieved and preserved on the 
basis of political and economic equality among .nations, the elimination of 
military domination and a determination to bring about disarmament. · 

This ennobling goal was bequeathed to us by the liberators and founding 
fathers of our various nations. They are indeed great · emancipators. The 
list of their names is long and each is illustrious. But to me some stand 
out as examples worthy of special mention-Jawaharlal Nehru, Ahmed 
Soekarno, Gamal Abdel Nasser, Kwame Nkrumah and Josip Broz Tito. 
These are the few whose far-sighted vision nursed the concept and nurtured 
the unity of the non-aligned: 

There is an integral, intrinsic and indissoluble link between non-alignment 
and anti-colonialism. The man who led the very first anti-colonial battle 
stated in his farewell message : "It is our true policy to steer clear of 
permanent alliances in any portion of the foreign world." 

It has also been said: "Whose freedom is by sufferance and at the will 
of a superior, he is never free." Baving struggled so hard against domination, 
could we again accept the shelter of the umbrellas' and shields of others? 
Could we acquiesce in outside ~.dvice as to where our interests lie, and who 
our friends should be? Was it for this that vast numbers of brave men 
and women suffered and died? 

We want to be friends with all. 

India's policy is to consolidate friend-

ship where it exists; where there is indifference, to create understanding 
and interest; and where there is hostility, to make every effort to minimize 
It is also our endeavour to find common areas, however small, between 
it. 
us and other nations, and to enlarge them. 

The past few years saw a welcome trend. Countries bound in military 
alliances sought to reach out to and build bridges with peoples in other 

Keynote address at the commemorative meeting to mark the twentieth anniversary of 
·the first Summit Conference of non-aligned countries New Delhi, February 11, 1981 

camps. Those who had earlier spared no occasion to declare non-alignment 
irrelevant, have now changed their stance and announced it to be obsolete. 
Surely, a concept does not become obsolete just when its validity is accepted 
by its former opponents? 

Little did we imagine that the cold war could so soon reassert itself. 
The thaw was short-lived. Military alliances are now being refurbished. 
The danger of armed conflict increases. Clear enough reason for us to 
remain alert, speaking and working for peace. 

Over the centuries, Europe has been the arena of bitter feuds and wars. 
Yet, even in the 18th century, its wars were extended to Asia and America. 
In the 19th century also, European empires fought one another in Asia, 
Africa and elsewhere. And in our century, Europe and America are 
conveniently and subtly transferring their problems to Asian soil. The 
Atlantic has polluted not only itself, but also the Pacific and Indian Oceans. 
The present situation is somewhat similar, though far more perilous, 
to that which faced the 1961 Belgrade Conference:· That Summit declared 
· · that the consequences of nuclear war would affect the ientire world, and. au· 
nations and peoples therefore had an abiding concern and. interest in. the 
avoidance of this calamity. The Conference then directly appealed to the 
leaders of the USA and USSR to avert nuclear war. 

The Non-aligned Movement was originally developed in the context 
In course of time, other centres of power came up 
of a bipolar world. 
and used their military and economic capacities to bend the policies of 
newly-free or small countries to fit in with their strategies. Today, even 
this multipolarity is less in evidence. 

Peace is vital for the evolution of mankind to the fullness of its promise 
and potential. But the prospects for peace have receded. The nuclear 
race carries with it the probability of nuclear war just as rain clouds .bring 
rain. Saving the world from nuclear war and other wars must be: one 
of our foremost cencerns. 

What was said in Belgrade is stilf true and bears repetition: "The 
non-aligned group of nations do not consider that differences in social 
systems constitute an insurmountable obstacle for the stabilization of peace, 
provided that attempts at domination and interference in the internal affairs 
of peoples and nations, and the use of ideologies for waging war, exercising 
pressure or imposing one's will, are ruled out." 

The renewal of assertive animosity between great powers, 

the 
competition of military presences in various parts of the globe, particularly 
in West, South and South-East Asia, the vertical increase in the stockpiles 
of nuclear-weapon powers, the neglect of economic development, and unfair 
practices in international trade-all these project new problems to challenge 
and justify our own endeavours. Our obligation is 
to exercise our 
independent judgement, to individually build self-reliance and collectively 
resist moves to divide us. 

Of great concern to all of us are the wide inequalities and disequilibriums 

in the economic and social structures of the world, the glaring imbalances '-
between demographic pressures and access to material and technological 
resources. What should be-invested in a construction is being channelled 
into destruction. There is a global waste of talent and resources. 

The solutions of today's critical international economic problems need 
the total involvement of all nations. Global well-being will be illusory unless 
the aspirations of developing countries are reflected in the management of 
the international economy and in the decisions of international negotiations. 
No less urgent is the ending of inequalities within our own societies. 

At the root of several problems which confront the non-aligned are 
differences which are imported from outside and fostered by external forces. 
Members of our group have been subjected progressively to a variety of 
µolitical and economic pressures. Let us unite to overcome them. Let us 
reassert the basic proposition of safeguarding freedom and defending justice 
and peace. For ourselves also, we must establish guidelines· to promote 
·_ greater cohesion :within our movemerit. AbQve all, let us resolve to settle 
disputes among our·own member-States; reconciling our differences through 

· muf.ual- understanding and· restraint, resisting external interference. 

Non-alignment is neither neutrality nor indifference. 

It involves active 
and free exercise of judgement on certain principles. Peace is not passive. 
As a remarkable woman of my country, the poet Sarojini Naidu said, "True 
peace is not the peace of negation, not the peace of surrender, not the peace 
of the coward, not the peace of the dying, not the peace qf the dead, but the 
peace-militant, dynamic, creative, of the human spirit which exalts." 
Today, let us concern ourselves with future, mobilizing all our resources, 
material and moral, in our co-operative quest for such a peace. 

Non-Alignment 

QUESTION : Non-alignment as an instrument of policy was conceived by 
.Jawaharlal Nehru in a world split by two power groups. How relevant is 
the policy today in changed international environment? 

It does 
PRlME MXNISTER : The concept of non-alignment is a dynamic one. 
not mean inaction, passive neutrality or withdrawal. Rather, it means 
considering international issues on their merits, coming to independent 

luterview to Press agencies of the non~'lligned countries on tho 
of the Non~aligned Movement, September 3; 1981 

twentieth anniversary 

conclusions consistent with national interest, and working determinedly for 
international friendship and the peaceful resolution of disputes. While it 
is true that this policy was born when the cold war was at its height, the 
philosophy underlying it remains valid today. Has 
international 
environment really changed so much? The renewed rhetoric of East-West 
confrontation is a reflection of the same attitudes of distrust which were 
manifested during the earlier cold war era. 

the 

QUESTION : Over the years the international priorities have changed from 
liquidation of colonialism and imperialism to achievement of national 
development. How does the policy of non-alignment seek to meet these 
new challenges? 

PRIME MINISTER : Non-alignment was the logical expression of the foreign 
policy of the anti-imp<)rialist :fight of the people o·f Asia, Africa and other 
regions. It is a manifestation of political self-assertion and the need for 
economic self-reliance of newly~free peoples. The first Conference of. 
Non-aligned Countries, held in Belgrade in 1961, was faced with the 
challenges of disarmament, decolonization and development. During the 
sixties, a large number of colonies, mostly from Africa, succeeded in throwing 
off the yoke of colonialism. This process continued in the seventies. With 
the achievement of independence by Zimbabwe, the movement has reached 
a new landmark. But it is by no means over. The liberation of Namibia 
has yet to come about. The Black majority is still being suppressed in 
itloreover, tremendous economic and political pressure is 
South Africa. 
being exerted on developing countries. There is also interference 
in 
• internal affairs and 
the giving of support to more pliable groups and 
parties. 

The Non-aligned Movement has noC restricted itself to efforts for 
It is worth recalling that the :first ever special session of the 
decolonizatiqn. 
UN General Assembly devoted to disarmament was held in 1978 as a result 
of the initiative of the non-aligned and the call they had given at the Belgrade 
Summit. 
In recent years, the deliberations of non-aligned conferences have 
been increasingly concerned with problems of development. Political 
independence is but a first step; freedom is not complete without the 
economic and social 
regeneration of our peoples. Within the UN 
framework and outside it, the non-aligned countries make every effort to 
adopt a co-ordinated approach in seeking solutions to pressing economic 
problems which are the consequence of technological backwardness as well 
as global tendencies. 

QUESTION : On the 20th anniversary of the Non-aligned Movement which 
is being observed by the community in September what message would you 
· like to give to readers in non-aligned and other countries? 

INTERJ'<ATIONAL AFFAIRS 

PRIME MINISTER : I should like to reiterate the faith of the people and 
Government of India in the principle of non-alignment which has stood 
the test of time. Periodically, purveyors of gloom have described th!') 
Movement as a spent force because of divisions within its ranks. But each 
successive conference of the non-aligned, including that of the Foreign 
Ministers of non-aligned countries, held in New Delhi in February 1981, 
has shown that nothing can be farther from reality. 
In a gathering of 
independent sovereign countries, practising 
forms of self-
governance, differences of approach and emphasis are bound to exist. 
Such differences testify to the health of the Movement rather than 
to 
its weaknesses. Resilience is a greater sign of strength than rigidity. What 
is significant is the harmonious manner in which we resolve our differences. 
So long as we continue 
to be motivated by a spirit · of conciliation, 
non-alignment will continue to be a source of strength to us and a benign 
influence in the world.· 

their own 

Plea for Reducing Tensions 
1T is A privilege to add my words of welcome to those which the President 
has already extended to the eminent leaders who have gathered here from 
I extend a special welcome to the 
two continents and from two oceans. 
new n1embers of our group: the Solomon Islands, Tuvalu, Kiribati and 
Vanuatu. 

This extended family '!11akes us.especially glad, for it is largely India's 
evolution into a Republic that gave its present form to the Commonwealth : 
a multi-racial group of nations with different political systems th~J has 
played a mediatory role of importance at some crucial moments. 

I remember also another conference held in this city 33 years ago. 
Neither we, nor many of the other nations represented today, were then free. 
But empires were retreating and freedom was 
in the air. My father 
Jawaharlal Nehru had assumed office in the interim transitional government. 
He considered it important to bring together leaders of other Asian 
countries. As he said, it was a watershed of human history when, after 
centuries of subjugation, Asia was emerging into freedom and assuming its 
rightful place with other continents. Even at that stage, he had scanned the 
far horizon and welcomed Australia and New Zealand as observers, 
realizing the commonality of many problems in the Pacific and South-East 
Asia, and the need for wider co-operation to find solutions to them. 

Address at the opening session of the Commonwealth Heads of Government Regionr,l 
Meeting, New Delhi, September 4, 1980 

Our agenda enumerates various aspects of 'functional co-operation'. 
Australia, to whose Prime Minister we owe the impetus for the CHOGRM 
movement, has presented a thoughtful document on the possibilities of 
regional co-operation. 
to 
greater give-and-take in assuring fair prices for raw materials, industrial 
development, lowering of tariff barriers, transfer of technology and sharing 
of experience and training facilities. We are particularly conscious of the 
special problems of the 
island economies and of the least developed 
countries. 

I hope that our deliberations will also lead 

I should like to repeat another of my father's sentiments which I fully 
endorse : "In this conference and in this work, there are no leaders and no 
followers. We meet on an equal basis." Without such equality not only. 
the substance of freedom but the world's survival is at stake. 
Insistence on 
predominance has wrought havoc enough. 
It has led to the carving out of 
spheres of influence and balance of power which hold peace to ransom. 
Professed ideologies may differ but pursuits of power seem to be similar .. 

. . We believe in true interdependence. But this .has no meaning unless . 

· there is a mutuality of interest. Such mutuality of interest between different 
nations and peoples which an interdependent world demands, can be 
achieved only when we succeed in establishing a new world order based on 
justice and equality. But omens for the realization of such a new order are 
discouraging. The affluent seem reluctant even for small adjustments which 
cannot really be considered sacrifices for them but which would make all the 
difference to us. We seldom get fair prices for our raw materials. 
Technology marches on, opening up fascinating vistas. But we still cannot 
reach out to them because, at every step, we are hampered by restrictive 
practices. As a result, the gap in the material levels of living of the rich and 
poor nations·:is widening. On the other hand, each passing day sharpens 
our people's own expectations. Development is a promise of material and 
social well-being. How can we persuade people to wait for the fulfilment 
even of their basic needs, to say nothing of their just aspirations for a fuller 
life? 

Grave and basic structural imbalances have developed in the global 
economy. A Special Session of the United Nations is currently devoting 
its attention to this question. We can only hope that there will be an earnest 
North-South dialogue which will come to terms with the root causes of our 
ills. The Brandt Commission, of which our distinguished friend, the 
Commonwealth Secretary-General was a member, has had the mortification 
of seeing its report pushed aside by countries of the North. The report of 
Commonwealth experts has also confirmed in substance the findings of 
the Brandt Commission. 

Oil has become the major focus of tension. 

It has added to the burdens 
of developing countries, vastly aggravating our task of reconstruction. 
Niore than three-fo,1rtbs of what India earns by exports, in a none 
too 

INTERNATIONAL AFFAJ;RS 

favourable international market, goes to import petroleum and petroleum 
products. 

But the oil crisis has also affected the advanced and· affluent countries 
which consume a disproportionate share of this dwindling resource. Their 
obsessive concern to ensure ever-growing supplies of oil has had an adverse 
It has led to a military build-up in our 
impact on international relations. 
region and added to the tensions. To me it seems imperative that an 
international conference be called by the producers to work out a scheme by 
which all consumers, big and small, are assured their necessary supplies. 
Obviously, preferential treatment should be given to the needs of countries 
which are most seriously affected. 

The common concern for peace, understanding and development has 
brought us together. But the outlook for peace has deteriorated and we· 
see uncertainty all around. The decade of the eighties has begun ominously. 
The collision of interests between powerful nations has . imperilled 
the 
stability and peaceful devel.opment of.countries in our vicinity·. No paj:t .. 
of the globe is remote. No country can feel sheltered from the pressure of 
these strategic conflicts or be beyond the reach of the flames of war. When 
the strongest feel insecure, what can we say of the security of countries like 
ours? 

The crisis in Afghanistan continues unabated. We are against any kind 
of interference in the affairs of others. But partisan postures or impromptu 
get~togethers are no substitute for statesmanship in solving such complex 
problems which can have far-reaching repercussions. No single power can 
claim a monopoly of wisdom or moral superiority. To condemn 
intervention in one place while tolerating it elsewhere does not carry 
09nviction._ Fortunately, there is increasing awareness of the need for a 
p-0litical solution which takes care of all legitimate security concerns. 

South-East Asia has been the arena of battle and is still in turmoil. 
Here again is the clashing of great power interests. We have always believed 
that each nation in the region 1nust preserve its personality and relate its 
interests to the welfare of the region. Groupings produce counter-groupings. 
India's viewpoint may be different from those of some others here, but we 
hope that our sincere efforts to promote understanding in the region will 
eventually bear fruit. 

The ocean has brought conquerors to India in the past. Today, we find 
it churning with danger. Even the Pacific hardly lives up to its name. 
The frantically increasing pace of militarization in the Indian Ocean makes 
the 3,500 miles of our coast more vulnerable. How can we acquiesce in any 
threat to our security environment or 
theory which tries. to justify the 
condone the existence of foreign bases and cruising fleets? 
Independence 
implies the responsibility of deciding what is good and safe for ourselves and 
of charting our own course. Any big power conflict in our oceans or 
neighbourhood will hit us hard. All this tension has built up because of the 

its 
collapse of detente and the resultant renewal of the cold war with all 
It is up to them to turn 
severity. Great powers have great responsibilities. 
away from the pursuit of power, which is in any case illusory, return to the 
negotiating table and come to aii understanding to dismantle the apparatus 
of confrontation. They can thereby make a decisive contribution to the 
reduction of tensions and set the world on the path of peace and progress. 
Cannot the Commonwealth build a bridge of understanding between them? 
Let us work together to harvest our marine zones for the benefit of our 
own people, and riches of the open sea for the welfare of all mankind. 

· face goes far beyond political and economic rivalries. 

Whether we like it or not, the problems of the future compel our 
attention, for they are already upon us. There are many aspects of the 
human condition which trouble thoughtful people. The crisis . that we 
It is a crisis of the 
spirit. For the first time in the story of our world, the human species and the 
values of civilization, which have enabled man to rise above his circumstances, 
are threatened because we have lost sight of t~e vision of our ancient sages . 
and are obsessed with the immediate discontent. 

If we, in India, are impatient, with no lack of will to solve present-day · 

problems, it is not only because of their significance to us here and now, but 
because I feel that the sooner we get them out of the way, the sooner shall we 
be able to get down to what is of deeper and more lasting consequence. 
Marvellous knowledge is being unfolded by adventurous minds, never 
daunted, for ever seeking. We must all combine to make the maximum 
use of it to help man to rise above himself to a new stage of evolution. 

The Value of CHOGRM 

PRIME MIN!STER : I would request the Secretary-General to say a few 
words before you ask questions. 

SECRETARY-GENERAL: Thank you Prime Minister, and ladies and gentlemen 
of the press of Asia and the Pacific region. We have very great privilege-
all of us-of having the Prime Minister of India with us at this press 
conference that marks the end of the second of these regional meetings of the 
Commonwealth countries of this area at the summit level. And I am certain 
that all those who were involved in the Conference, the Presidents and the 
Prime Ministers who were here, would want the very first words at this press 

Press conference by Prime Minister;smt Indira Gandhi, and the Secretary-General of the 
Commonwealth Secretariat, Dr S.S. Ramphal, New Delhi, September 8, 1980 

conference from me to be the words of appreciation to the Prime Minister, 
Mrs Indira Gandhi, who has been our Chairman and who conducted our 
proceedings with .such experience, skill and tact that we have come to the 
end of-as everyone regards-an extremely successful meeting. We owe 
a great deal to the Prime Minister, we owe a great deal to the Government of 
India and to all its many officials who have worked to make this possible. 

These regional summits are just one example of the Commonwealth 
working together, and this experience has reinforced the tremendous value 
of this occasion. 
In a world in which this kind of dialogue takes place all 
too rarely, Commonwealth occasions are indeed quite unique in providing 
this facility, sometimes, as at Lusaka, among the Commonwealth leaders 
world-wide, and, on this occasion, among the leadership of a very very large 
part of the Commonwealth in Asia and the Pacific. 
I think, we render 
service not only to the region of the Commonwealth but to the world as a 
whole in making it possible to have these occasions. 
The very distinguished father of the P~·ime Minister, Pandit Nehru: who 
. was in so many ways father of' the modern Commonwell.lth as well, orice said 
that the mere potential of the Commonwealth is that it could bring a touch of 
I believe that 
healing to the troubled world. The world is very troubled. 
on this occasion the Commonwealth has lived up to that potential and has 
sought to bring a touch of healing to it. And I invite you now to address 
your questions to us. 

QUESTION : I am on a peripheral issue. Can I understand that when Pakistan 
makes a request to join the Commonwealth again, you would support it? 

PRIME MINISTER : When the question comes up, we will look at it. 

QUESTION : Mrs Gandhi, could you tell us what was the response at the 
Conferei:lce·to your suggestion for an oil conference? 

PRIME MINISTER : Actually, an oil conference is sitting right now. What I 
meant was that they should go into the question in much greater depth since 
this problem is one which is uppermost in most people's minds, whether they 
live in Europe or Asia or Africa or Latin America or North America, and 
has created a very real crisis. There has to be not only a study or going in 
great depth of the question but also a genuine desire to see that certain justice 
is done in this matter to the countries, big or small. That is all I meant. 
I was just throwing up an idea. We did not discuss this idea at the meeting 
at all. 

In fact, it was more in the nature of loud thinking. 

QUESTION : Mr 
very successful. 
touch? 

Secretary-General, you have described the Conference as 
Are. there any tangible results, apart from· the healing 

I would regard the healing 

SECRETARY-GENERAL : A great many. 
touch 
itself as very tangible. Conferences have two broad areas of achievement. 
One is in the area of practical things that happen as a result. And a good 
deal of the Conference was devoted to matters of that kind-the areas of 
practical co-operation between the countries of the region, between all the 
countries. With a view to advancing their interests, we spent a good deal of 
time talking about special measures of co-operation that might be taken to 
help the smallest countries, the island countries of the Pacific; and out of it 
has come a range of proposals on energy, on industrial co-operation, on 
trade, which are of great practical value to them. 

PRIME MINISTER : May I add that the very fact that some of these countries 
have come for the :first time to this type of conference-and especially to 
India-is very valuable to them as well as to us. When I say 'us', I a1n not 
talking of the Government, but the people of India. 

QUESTION : How would you; Madam Prime Minister, describe the Joint 
Communique which has just beeri issued? 

PRIME MINISTER : Well, I think it is a good Communique. V{hen people get 
together and agree in such a spirit of understanding, co-operation and 
goodwill on matters which are controversial and on which there are 
differences of opinion, I think that is quite an achievement. 

QUESTION : The Conference Communique has given the agreed formulations 
on Afghanistan and Kampuchea. After this, would there be a follow-up 
either by the Commonwealth Group or by countries irtdividually for getting 
a solution to these problems? 

PRIME MINISTER : Well, many people are trying. Some are in the Common-
wealth and some are not. We ourselves have been meeting a large ·number 
of people individually and otherwise. All these efforts are on in various 
parts of the globe. 

QUESTION : On Afghanistan it says : "Pending such a settlement, we stress the 
need to de-escalate tension". What exactly are the measures to be taken 
to de-escalate the tension in Afghanistan? 

PRIME !~INISTER : Well, it is rather difficult to give a categorical list, but I 
think you could take it that we should do everything possible so that tensions 
are not escalated, and that is what India has been trying to do from the very 
beginning. 

QUESTlON : Mrs Gandhi, could you tell us as t9 what components have been 
discussed during this conference which constitute a political settlement in 
the case of Afghanistan? 

PRIME MINISTER: I do not think any components as such were discussed. 
There is agreement on one point, that the Soviet troops should withdraw. 
The Soviets themselves say that they want to withdraw on certain conditions. 
So, we have to see whether it is possible to create conditions which would be 
satisfactory all around. 

in the Communique says : "There is an 
QUESTION : The formulation 
agreement on the general perception that the troops should be withdrawn 
from Vietnam and from Afghanistan". But in the speeches there were sharp 
differences of assessment and perception. Therefore, does one take it that 
there has been a glossing over those differences? How have you arrived 
at this formulation, because the differences stay? And we (India) seem to 
have been the only party saying something to which neither the Prime 
Minister Lee Kuan Yew or the Australian Prime Minister or the New Zealand 
Prime Minister, who mattered, agreed. How do we 
take it, there is. 
agreement or there is no agreement? 

PRIME MINISTER : _First; I would· say· that· everybody matters.· · I do not . 
think it is fair to say that so and ·so ·ma.tters and the others do not. 
Otherwise, there would be no point in having a conference· and seeking the 
views of the others. But, as I said in the beginning, there are bound to be 
differences. 
India's view is well known; and there are very good reasons 
for those views. Certain other countries have differed with us previously on 
other 1natters also, but the effort is always to see which is the area of 
agreement and whether we can work on that. Now, the biggest area of 
agreement is that there should be peace, that ways should be found to remove 
the tension or the difficulties that have arisen. So, this is what we have to 
work on. 
that everybody is 
perfectly frank and the discussion is informal. We wanted people to know 
what we thought and what were the reasons which led to these conclusions; 
and this we were able to get across. Other countries could also put their • 
own points of view. Would you like to add to it, Mr. Secretary-General? 

I think the value of such conferences is 

SECRETARY-GENERAL : Well, Madani Prime Minister, just to draw the 
distinction between analysis of the past-an analysis of reasons why things 
happened-and a projection towards the future. 
think one of the 
elements that emerged very clearly from the conversation was that it was 
possible to disagree on the analysis on the reasons for events and yet be able 
If you could maximize that 
to agree on what was desirable in the future. 
area of agreement then surely the discussion and the conclusions represent a 
very positive advance. 

QUESTION : Was there any general agreement on the conditions for 
withdrawal of troops from Afghani_stan, between India and other speakers, 
who had disagreed at the outset? 

PRIME MINISTER : \Vell, since the Soviet troops are there, they are mostly 
concerned with the conditions. We can only play the part of trying to 
persuade people, and this is what we have been doing. 
I do not think we 
need to go into the details of conditions. Do you want to add to it, Mr. 
Secretary-General? 

SECRETARY-GENERAL : Merely perhaps to invite acknowledgement of the 
fact that this has been a very unusual discussion. It has been an opportunity, 
a rare opportunity, in the world for differing points of view at the highest 
political levels to come together, and this in itself represents a contribution 
to the creation of conditions more favourable to a settlement acceptable to 
all concerned; and it is the kind of settlement that the heads of government 
have been looking forward to. 

PRIME MINISTER : And it may lead to further efforts. 

QUESTION : The communique on Kampuchea mentions the need for a 
comprehensive political solution. · Does this· also· envisage· stationing -of.• 
the UN Peace-Keeping · Force? Did this question come up before the 
Conference? 

PRIME MINISTER : No, we did not go in such details. 

QUESTION : Mrs Gandhi and Mr Ramphal, the Conference has agreed on 
reducing tensions in connection with Afghanistan. Have you agreed 
privately or individually on.any initiative to carry this out? I mean, has your 
Government been approached by other Governments to try and work on 
the Soviet Union or something like that. 

PRIME MtNISTER : As I said in reply to an earlier question, India has been 
fairly active in this for many months. Many people have 'come to our 
counn:y to meet us on this issue, and we have sent our Foreign Secretary, 
our Foreign Minister and others to other countries. So, the effort has been 
a continuous one. 

QUEST\ON : Madam Prime Minister, our Australian friends have expressed 
the hope that India would be able to talk very specifically to the Soviet Union 
on some of these issues because of close relationship between New Delhi 
and Moscow. Will you comment on that? 

PRIME MlNISTER : There is no question of "would be able to" because we 
have already done ~o from the beginning. We are not in the habit of saying 
one thing on a person's face and another behind his back. What we have 

~TBRNATIONAL AFFAIRS 

said, we have said publicly to them as well as to others, with equal force 
privately to them and to others. 

One thing more. 

I know that whenever the Western correspondents 
ask such a question, they always tag on to it ''our special relationship". 
would like to make it clear, which I have done on countless occasions, that 
we have got friendship with the Soviet Un.ion and so have we with the 
countries of all the continents of this globe. We are not pro-Soviet or 
anti-Amedcan. We are merely pro-Indian. We have friendship with some 
countries, and we are constantly trying to strengthen friendship where it 
is not so strong, and to build friendship where it does not exist. 

QUESTION : The Conference seems to have devoted a great deal of its time 
on economic matters, on growing tensions, on restrictive trade practices, 
but I find that you have ended on a weak note on follow-up measures. The 
sentence says: "· .. requested the Secretary-General in consultation with 
member-countries subject to the availability of resources , .. " 

PR.IME lvfINISTER : Secreta~y-Generalwill reply to it,. but I think you have 
. gone off completely at a tangeilt. That is not the economic co-operation. 
That is only with regard to the ·stationing of a unit, or whatever you would 
like to call it, in a particular part. That is the least part of the economic 
co-operation. Anyway, Secretary-General will reply to that. 

QUESTION : But my point is that having taken such a serious note of the 
growing economic matters, you do not seem to have taken equally serious 
note of the follow-up measures. 

PRIME MINISTER : We have taken follow-up measures bilaterally as well 
as multilaterally, but this programme is to be followed up by the Common-
wealth Secretariat as a whole, not in any regional way. But, because there 
was a desire that there should be a regional unit, that matter will be explored 
further. 

QUESTION : But, considering the seriousness of the situation, do you think 
this approach of leaving it to the Commonwealth Secretariat ... 

PRIME MINISTER : No, this is a very limited matter and this matter need 
not be decided by one group alone. This has to go to the entil'e Common-
wealth. We cannot decide that the Commonwealth will do this. We 
arejust a small portion of it. 

QUESTION : Therefore, will you have to go to the Commonwealth? 

PRIME MINISTER : Please try to understand that this has nothing to do with 
economic co-operation as such. They just mentioned that it would be 

useful for us to have such a thing. And it is not on economic matters 
only. They generally feel that they are cut off and they want certain 
informations and they want certain other links. So, we said this is a kind 
of a link, to link them with the rest of the world, to keep them informed 
of various issues and so on. So, this has nothing to do with the economic 
thing as a whole. 

It is very small, almost an extra, I wonld say. 

SECRETARY-GENERAL : I think you must not be misled by the heading 
"follow-up action", as if this paragraph represented all that needs to be 
done to fulfil the intentions of the heads of government, particularly in the 
area of international economic issues, which, I believe, was one of the 
elements you were referring to. There is a great deal that the heads of 
government have projected which,:will go into the international domain, 
in which governments will play very important roles. 
I am sure., it would 
not have been lost on you that very significant recommendations have been 
made. 

PRIME M~N1STBR :If you read the whole cif it, I think, you will find the ansv,:er 
of the economic part there. 

Q11EsTION: Mrs Gandhi and Mr Ramphal, can you please tell me why the 
Communique deals with the situation in the Middle East, when this conference 
is a regional conference dealing with Pacific and Central, Southern and 
South-East Asia. 

PRIME MINISTER : Well, some members suggested and others went along 
with it. 

SECRETARY-GENERAL : And Middle East does represent a ve~y substantial 
area of tensions in the world. This is a part of the world that can be affected 
by the escalation of these tensio1ts. The first Regional Conference in Sydney 
did have in its communique a paragraph on the Middle East and it is not 
out of place. 

QuEST~ON : Madam, on subjects like economic co-operation,trade, protec-
tionism, etc., the interests of regional Commonwealth countries appear 
to be different from those of other countries of the Commonwealth, like 
Britain and others, which belong to the advanced group. How are you 
going to reconcile these interests as members of the regional community 
and as a part of the bigger Commonwealth community? 

PRIME MINiSTER : Well, interests differ even within the region. It is not 
just between the region and Europe and some other areas. The whole 
point of these get-togethers is to try and find a way out. 

· INTERNATIONAL AFFAll{S 

QUESTION : In reply to a question just now you mentioned tb.e efforts India 
is making towards solution of the Afghanistan problem. In that context 
you mentioned that emissaries have been sent out and you have been having 
discussions with the foreign dignitaries. But what has been the net result 
of all this? How far have we advanced towards the solution of this problem? 

PRIME MINISTER : You know, these things cannot be measured in inches, 
feet or yards. There was a time when everybody thought that big powers 
were on a collision course. Now that has been avoided, so, that by itself 
was not only an effort, but a good result of the effort. 

QUESTION : Madam Prime Minister, the fact that the next Conference is 
being held in Fiji, does it indicate that this regional conference is going to 
be a permanent feature of the Commonwealth? 

SECRETARY~GENBR:AL : You know, one can never talk in terms of permanance 
in a world that is changing very quickly. 
· The. heads of government have 
agreed that they ,vill meet again, and they will meet in Fiji in two years' · 
time. The Com1nonwealth meetings evolve, and I think we must just go 
along with that evolution and proceed from Conference to Conference. 
The Commonwealth is against institutionalizing any of its arrangements 
It is essentially pragmatic and evolutionary, and I think this 
too much. 
kind of meeting will retain that character. 

QUESTION : You earlier mentioned that the efforts of the Conference may 
result in another meeting of similar kind. 
\Vill any specific meeting in 
the near future discuss Afghanistan? 

PRIME MINISTER : No. 

QUESTION : I want to know, whether the Conference had noted some 
differences in local laws regarding illicit drugs and terrorism. How are you 
going to tackle this problem? ·· Was hijacking also discussed in terrorism 
and other things? 

SECRETARY-GENERAL : At the Sydney meeting, which preceded this one, 
two working groups, one on illicit drugs and another on terrorism, had 
been set up. What the Conference did was to consider the reports of these 
working groups and one of the elements in the report was that tb.e laws were 
in some respects out of step, and co-operation in these areas could be 
enhanced if there was a greater measure of harmonization. What the 
Conference had agreed was that in both areas the authorities should continue 
to maintain contact, should work towards this degree of harmonization and, 
through that process; help to respond to the very specific threats these 

problem areas pose. Hijacking was just one of the elements of ten·orist 
activities that was the concern of the working group on Terrorism. Neither 
issue was a matter of central focus of the discussions at the Conference. 

QUESTION : Was the role of Interpol in this connection discussed and 
does the Commonwealth Conference find it useful? 

SECRETARY-GENERAL : Well, that did arise in the work of the working 
group on terrorism and, to some extent, illicit drugs as well. Authorities, 
as you know, are very close with the Interpol. 

QUESTION : We have welcomed in the Communique the Brandt Commission 
Report and the report of the Commonwealth Group of Experts but what 
we notice today.is that the developed world, irrespective of these reports, 
is taking steps towards protectionism, towards countervailing duties, towards 
reducing exports from countries like . us, the primary producers. Then, 
we feel, that in prices of primary products we .a1·e not being given a fair deal. 
Therefore, can this expression of hope about Brandt Commission. be 
accepted as.feasible in the present circumstances? One does not feel so. 

PRIME MINISTER : Circumstances change. The steps which have been taken, 
I agree with you, are not at all helpful to the developing and the poor 
countries. Many of these countries, in conversation, agree that they must 
do something and that they are thinking of various measures. So, we have 
to keep at it. 

SECRETARY-GENERAL : There is always the danger, Madam Prime Minister, 
that when a question is posed, I talk far too long. You have stated a reality 
correctly. The response of the developing countries is very negative today. 
As we sit here, the special session of tlie General Assembly on development 
is encountering very serious difficulties. The heads of government have 
drawn attention to the fact that they hope this will advance the prospects 
of a global round of negotiations. ··. This is a very significant group of 
the heads of government from the developed and the developing countries, 
who have given their broad assessment to the approach of the Brandt 
Commission and have welcomed the idea of informal summit meeting that 
is designed not to negotiate the whole range of issues but to create a political 
climate and a political will in the world which will make more successful 
negotiations possible. One of the things we have found is that, from time 
to time, negotiations can become bogged down, become very technocratic, 
very bureaucratic and need an injection of political will. Now, 
if this 
conference has helped, and will help, the world opinion to move in this 
direction, then I think it offers an element of hope in what, I agree, is a 
fairly dark situation. 

tNTBRNATIONAL AFFAIRS 

QUESTION : Is there any special reason of hope for change of heart among 
the rich countries? 

SECRETARY-GENERAL : Yes, I think so. 
I believe that it is becoming plearer 
that national interest of all countries will be better served by a positive 
response to ending or certainly reducing disparities that exist in the world. 
In other words, it has become clear that it is not a question of charity any 
It is a question in the mutual interest of the rich and the poor 
more. 
countries who are demanding restructuring of the world economy. 

QUESTION : That was not the impression we got from Mr Lee Kuan Yew's 
speech in which he said we should plug ourselves into the grid of the 
· multinationals. 

SECRETARY-GENERAL: You·will find that the Prime Minister of Singapore 
also spoke very strongly. about tht need for a positive adjustment policy 
on the part of the developed countries, and only tangentially about the need 
of protectionism. 

QUESTION : Madam Prime Minister, I would like to take you back to 
pal'agraph seven of the Communique dealing with Kampuchea. 
It is quite 
a bit vague. It says: "There was ul'gent need for a comprehensive politicai 
solution to the Kampuchean problem which would ensure sovereignty, 
independence and neutrality of Kampuchea ... " Now, do we take 
it that the Conference has been able to sort out differences between the 
Indian Government and say Singapore where diametrically opposite 
positions have been taken? 

PRIME MINISTER : I have dealt with this earlier. Thel'e are differences both 
on assessment as well as on the present situation, but effort was to find areas 
of agreement. We found ourselves unable to support the Pol Pot regime 
and, perhaps, you are aware that Indian journalists and other foreign 
journalists from U.S. and other-places had gone there and brought back 
very horrifying stories at that time. 

QuEST~ON : One clarification. Does this paragraph leave the question of 
the existing Heng Samrin Government open? 

PRIME MINISTER: So far as we are concerned, we have recognized it. So, 
it is not open for us. 

QUESTION : Can the same parallel be drawn between the- Indian intervention 
in Bangladesh, which was for a specific purpose, and Vietnam? 
In the case 
of Vietnam, the parallel ends there. We were in a hurry to get out of 

Bangladesh but Vietnamese are staying put. 
In these circumstances, how 
far is it justified for the Government of India to recognize a Government 
aided, abetted and backed by Vietnamese intervention forces? 

PRIME MINISTER : You know situations don't arise out of air. Lot of things 
happen before one can ask why a certain situation arose and why a particular 
direction was taken. We all know the history of Vietnam and of the 
interference there, and at that time also India was, for a long time, practically 
alone in its assessment of the situation. But ultimately it was our view that 
I am not saying that we are always right. No person or no 
prevailed. 
country is. But on a number of occasions, our assessment has turned out 
to be the correct one ultimately. And, today, the Heng Samrin Government 
has control of the major part of the country, which is one of the usual norms 
for recognizing a Government. 

.SECRETARY•GENERAL : Might I invite your attention to the fact that the 
.· · . Communique does record unanimity among the heads of government about . 
. their conviction of the need for the. withdrawal of foreign forces froin the. 
country? There was no ambiguity on that issue. 

PRIME MINISTER : I would not say there is a parallel. I think there are many 
differences in the two situations which you mentioned. 

QUESTION : May I ask the Secretary-General specifically that in view of the 
deliberations here of the Commonwealth countries and the Communique 
issued, do you personally have the view that this is guarantee enough for 
the Afghan people from foreign interference and that there is enough ground 
for the.Soviet Government to withdraw their troops? 

SECRETARY-GENERAL : You can never talk of guarantees in an area of this 
kind. What you do is, you make progress ve-i:y slowly by the collective 
opinion, by the efforts of governments, by making use of changing circum-
stances in the world. What has been good is that the heads of government 
have agreed on the objectives of policy. 

QUESTION : Mrs Gandhi, do you think that the Commonwealth framework 
could be used to de-escalate the Afghan and Kampuchean crises? So many 
countries belong to thfr, region. 

PRIME M~N~STER : Every little help matters. I suppose we can look at it from 
that angle. 

Building a Sane World Order 
J FEEL PRIVILEGED to speak on behalf of the various delegations who have 
come to this beautiful city and on behalf of the Government and people 
of India. 
I thank the Rt. Hon.Malcolm Fraser for his eloquent and far-seeing . 
address, and the Government of Australia for the warm and very friendly 
welcome accorded to us. The arrangements made for this important con-
ference have been meticulous, and the hospitality is proof of the friendliness 
of the Australian people. The dynamism and friendliness of our Secretary-
General, Dr Shridath Ramphal, symbolize the Commonwealth spirit. 

I join in greeting and warmly welcoming our new members Vanuatu, 
Zimbabwe and Belize. This is Prime Minister Mugabe's first personal 
appearance at a Commonwealth Summit, but spiritually his country has 
long been present ju our councils. 

The Commonwealth is a useful international institution in the perplexed. 
and trouble-torn world of today. 
It is a forum for mature deliberations. 
It helps to generate understanding and goodwill. Its significance is borne 
out by the presence of the heads of so many governments. Busy men 
and women accustomed to count every minute of their time would not spend 
a week together we1e they not convinced of the value of this meeting to 
promote the common good. 

It 

is fitting that we meet in Australia, a founder-member of the 
It is also appropriate that the host city should be 
Commonwealth. 
Melbourne where the first meeting of the Federal Parliament took place 
eighty years ago. This island-continent, with its vast spaces, rich endowment 
of natural resources and dynamic people is bounded by the Indian and the 
Pacific Oceans. Mr Fraser has elsewhere described Australia as a Western 
country which is in the East, a Northern country (in its economic conno-
tation) which is in the Southern Hemisphere and an affluent country whose 
neighbours are mostly developing countries. This has enabled Australia 
to transcend the limitations that circumscribe the vision of most other 
advanced nations. Mr Fraser's own speech today showed comprehension 
of the dilemmas that we face, and the concerns of the poorer sections of 
the world. 

Four-fifths of the twentieth century is behind us and we are justified 
in taking stock of achievements and setbacks since 1900. The end of 
empires and the emergence of more than 100 countries into freedom is one 
of the more remarkable events of this century. The Comn1onwealth is 

Speech at the inaugural session of the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting, 
Melbourne, September 30, 1981 

itself a symbol of this great change, of the transformation of an imperial 
hierarchy into a fellowship of equals. It has contributed to the overcoming 
of old prejudices and the fashioning of a new outlook. The freedom and 
resurgence of a latge part ·of Africa are a tribute to the Commonwealth 
spirit. But one last bastion of the racists remains, openly defying world 
opinion. The unfinished battle in Southern Africa is a challenge which 
we must face with determination. 

The very informality of the Commonwealth's proceedings and methods 
of functioning is conducive to deeper understanding and the acceptance 
of mutual obligation. The convention that the Commonwealth should 
eschew bilateral disputes has helped it to concentrate on areas of larger 
common concern and to develop constructive approaches for co-operative 
action. 

The wmld is threatened by two major dangers. The first and more 
obvious is the recrudescence of confrontation between the big powers, and 
the fearful. increase in armament8--rtudear and conventional-. and· their 
spread to various parts of the· globe. The seco11d is· the persistence of. 
econo1nic distress among large sections of n1ankind and the ·widening of 
the gap between the developtd and the developing. The prospects of 
building a sane world order are in dire peril. 

What is the role of the Commonwealth at this critical juncture? The 
Commonwealth is composed of many regional and small powers. We may 
interpret the causes of the cold war vaiiously, but the menacing reality 
of the present leaves little room for any divergence. 
It is imperative that 
we assume a greater responsibility and interpose our moral and political 
strength against policies and actions which jeopardize the very basis of · 
human existence. As we meet here together, our collective perception 
should be sharpened. When we disperse, we should use our influence in 
quiet ways to urge r~straint and conciliation on the big powers and help to 
build bridges of understanding between con.tending parties. At this hinge 
of human history, this is an obligation we cannot shirk. 

One of the consequences of the revival of the cold war is the setback 
to the process of building regional stability through patient negotiations 
and gradual enlargement of co-operation among neighbouring countries. 
India is deeply concerned that the cold war is being extended to its 
neighbourhood with the inevitable consequences of mounting tensions. 
Perseverance over the last few years had yielded some promise of regional 
harn1ony. We were seeking peaceful solutions to bilateral problems through 
discussions, hoping thus to reduce recourse to armaments. All of a sudden, 
the acquisition of sophisticated military equipment is being preferred to the 
security that friendship alone can bring. The test of constructive diplomacy 
will be the restoration of the process of regional co-operation among the 
countries concerned without the intrusion of outside interests. 

The second danger to which I referred is the increase in disparities 
between the technological haves and have-nots. Most developing countries 
are still dependent for their earnings on the export of one or two primary 
commodities. The costs of producing them are mounting but they are not 
fetching correspondingly higher prices. The situation is aggravated by 
the protectionist policies of most affluent countries and the enormous rise 
in the costs of imported machinery and other industrial goods. Industrialized 
countries also are affected by the rise in oil prices but are able to pass on 
most of the increased costs to others through exports. They also receive 
large investments from the oii exporting countries. The non-oil-producing 
developing countries are, thus, pressurised from all sides. Also, their 
difficulties might tempt stronger powers to enforce new forms of dependency 
relationships. 

In the last few decades, nation after nation has been engaged in the 
search for political independence, economic welfare and a new economic 
international order based on justice and equality. The whole world ·must 
transform itseiffrom a collection -of unequals into· a community of equals-. -
equals not perhaps in material affluence but in opportunities, in the assurance -
of freedom from want and from fear, and in self-esteem. Representing 
as we do both developed and developing countries, this conference, 
in 
particular, can view economic realities in a wider perspective and see the 
consequences to humanity of a continuing failure to find a way out which can 
only emerge from new forms of economic co-operation. 

Within a few weeks another conference is being held in Mexico and 
people look to it to initiate steps for global co-operation. Through its 
own discussions and creative effort, let the Commonwealth. show how its 
member-States, comprising a billion people, can help one another. Let our 
voices in l\1elbourne reach out to Mexico so that that conference can become 
a springboard for a concrete programme of development and economic 
secupty. 

On behalf of all of us gathered here, I thank Prime Minister Fraser 
once more for hosting this conference, for his Government's hospitality 
and the lead he has given in his opening remarks. 

The Crisis of Asia and the World 
i\T THE OPENING session, I tried to voice the di;:ep concern of vast masses 
of humanity over the deteriorating international situation. In the two years 

Remarks on · political matters at the Executive Session of the Commonwealth Heads of 
Government Meeting, Melbourne, October 1, 1981 

since the Lusaka Commonwealth Conference, the world has become harsher. 
The cold war has re-emerged, perhaps, in greater severity than previously. 
The patient efforts of the last few years to promote detente and reduce 
tensions among the big powers have been overtaken by policies of confronta-
tion, containment and rearmament. This is the cause for profound disquiet 
because dangers have come closer to us and if these trends are not rPv':lrsed 
in time, our expectations of development and of a better life for the under-
privileged will turn to ashes. What is at stake is the very survival of 
humanity. 

The current phase of the cold war is reminiscent of the brinkmanship 
of the early post-war years. But it is far more dangerous, since 
the 
nuclear-weapon powers oftoday(especially the super-powers) have a vastly 
greater capacity for global annihilation than in the fifties. Any war involving 
the two of them directly could wipe out the whole of mankind and many 
other innocent species. Against this nuclear reality, theoretical arguments 
which are sometimes advanced are an affront to reason, for they seem 
designed to lull people into the false hope that it is . possible to have a 
nuclear war without paying the high cost of damage and destruction. 

Proliferation· should not be taken to mean only the enlargement of 
the club of nuclear-weapon powers which has open and clandestine members. 
The relentless vertical escalation of stockpiles is even more menacing. 
Points of friction and crisis are being multiplied. To us in India, adding 
to military might does not increase security; rather it heightens the very 
insecurity. History shows that an arms race does not really give lasting 
positions of strength or superiority. Having fought so hard for our 
independence, how can we accept the concept .of one or two countries 
retaining world primacy or leadership? Every exercise of coercive power is 
bound to invite a counter-thrust from the opposite camp, which is how the 
ladder is climbed, rung after rung, towards open war. 

Some hope had been raised that the accumulation of armaments could 
be stopped. But it is clear that decisions have been taken on new and more 
sophisticated nuclear weapons. Missile programmes have been stepped up. 
Since I came in, I have been inundated with letters and messages asking 
me that I should bring up at the Conference the question of peace. It has 
been graphically pointed out that the money spent on a single ICBM could 
irrigate a million hectares, build 65,000 rural dispensaries or feed 50 million 
children. 
Instead, what is being done intensifies economic disparities. 
However, for all its ominousness, the revival of this spirit of confrontation 
should not obscure a significant development. There are nations, there 
are statesmen and thinkers in many countries who have deep misgivings 
about over-reliance on militarism and about the postulates of sustaining 
their economies by strengthening the armaments industry. We cannot 
brush aside the voice of the common man expressing itself in non-political 
peace movements which are becoming a force for peace. 

bitter confrontation between the big powers has deprived us of the necessary 
conditions for our self-sustaining progress, viz. stability and peace. 

I should like to reiterate that we are not against the rich or the affluent, 
the East or the West or the North. We want to resolve the problems we 
face in our own country. We must follow the ideals which are relevant to 
our position and for our progress. These ideals which were first enunciated 
by our leaders are timeless and still relevant. How sad that even our 
expressions of frustration and anguish are resented! 

We hope that the Commonwealth, comprising as it does the developed 
and developirig countries, will use its influence constructively to change 
these attitudes before some of us meet again in Mexico. 
Interdependence, 
without assurance of equality and social justice, will merely be a slogan 
to cloak international feudalism. 

It is said that we are close to the Soviet Union. 

I should like to point 
out that-all ofus here.are pro our own countries, But how can we not accept 
those who hold out the hand of friendship or come to our assistance in our 
. times of need, especially when we are denied help from any other quarter? 
I should like to acknowledge that the U.S. has been the biggest donor 
of assistance to India. Our milita1y purchases have been diversified and 
we buy our needs from anywhere around the globe, subject only io their 
being to our best advantage. Unfortunately, certain countries are in the 
habit of attaching strings. Fortunately, many European countries have 
begun to take advantage of market opportunities and do not attach strings. 
Our decisions remain outs. They are not influenced by such help as 
we may receive. vVe take our decisions solely on considerations of national 
interest and the interest of world peace. 

Against this background, let me touch upon some problems of Asia. 
The issues concerning Afriqa, Europe and the Caribbean will be dealt with 
by those of our colleagues who are more directly affected. 

First, there is no recognizable political Asian identity or con~ensus 
as there is in Western Europe, or Latin America, or Africa. There may be 
differences within these groups; but they are able to project an African, 
European or Latin American point of view. Perhaps our continent is too 
large and diverse, and the civilizations that it has cradled have left too deep an 
impress. 

In the last two years, there have been some complex developments in 
the West Asian region. The revolution in Iran has not yet spent.its course. 
Its significance in contemporary history can be surmised, although not yet 
fully understood. 
It was, above all, a phenomenon of the 11ci_11~aligned 
nationalism; for Iran (as for other countries), its own strategic Ifuportance 
in the geo-political context is more a liability than an asset. Irai1's conflict 
with Iraq, which we hope will be resolved through negotiations; ixemplifies 
the difficulties of competing nationalisms 'and the burden theyhnpose on 
fledgling nations, even when isolated from great power involvement. 

Very different is Afghanistan which has become embroiled in a trial 
of strength between the super-powers. 
If we are sincere in our wish to see 
the withdrawal of the Soviet presence from Afghanistan, as India definitely 
is, a political and negotiated settlement should be reached taking into account 
the concerns of all involved parties. This is the only way to ensure a 
non-aligned · Afghanistan, and to reduce if not eliminate tensions in the 
region. 
India is gravely concerned at the use of Afghanistan as a pretext 
for a massive, externally funded and encouraged militarization in our 
\Ve should like to caution that the limit between what 
neighbourhood. 
is reasonable and what is provocative in armaments cannot be decided by 
outside powers, ignoring local realities. This would spark off explosions 
which will damage their own interests and those of the region. 

At the other end of West Asia, which is what you call the :Middle East, 
we were shocked by Israel's action in striking out against Palestinians and 
Arabs -with impunity. The Gulf has long been militarized. The tension is 
· exacerbated in the Indian. Ocean. Armadas with nuclear weapons are 
cruising up and· down, This is of concern to us, with· the long coastline· 
we have. Action begets reaction, leading to alarming build-up of naval 
power. 
\Ve consider the presence of the 1najor powers in the Indian Ocean 
an ominous intrusion in our marine environs which, until ten years ago, 
had been quite peaceful. Many of the littoral and hinterland States of the 
Indian Ocean-some of them represented here-have repeatedly called, in 
the UN and elsewhere, for the withdrawal of competitive military presences 
there. Unfortunately, the recommendations of the UN Resolution have 
been brushed aside. That demand needs to be reinforced. 

There is polarization also in South-East and East Asia. Vietnam's 

intervention in Kampuchea cannot be isolated from the context,pf t~,e . 
barbarous dict~torship of Pol Pot and the external interest in sustaining 
it. We are receptive to the opinions of our friends in the ASEAN countries. 
We have no reason to be defensive about our own recognjtion of the reality 
in K.ampuchea. We have taken our decision consciously and after due 
consideration of all aspects of the question. Nations should try to face 
facts. 
I remember that when we recognized the People's Republic of China, 
it was said we were isolated and we were similarly criticized. 

We urge those countries of South-East Asia, who are engaged in conflict, 
to reach a negotiated settlement in their common interest. ASEAN's 
c01nmendable experiment in regional co-operation needs the ambience of 
trust that only a larger accommodation with Vietnam, Laos and Kampuchea 
can provide. The path of peace is to relax the tensions which are polarising 
and dividing Asia. 

China is in a central position to contribute to drJtente in Asia. We 
do have differing world views. 
India believes that policies of strategic 
alignments or strategic consensus increase polarization and confrontation. 
It is well known how hard we have tried to improve our relations with 

China and Pakistan. We are doing so and shall continue to do so. How-
ever, in this process of improvement of relations with neighbours, we have 
no wish to be implicated in cold war alignments. Such an outcome would 
be self-defeating. 

\Ve are genuinely interested in developing regional co-operation through 
multilateral networks like the Commonwealth as well as through bilateral 
exchanges. Our hosting of the Commonwealth Regional Heads of Govern-
ment Meeting of the Asia-Pacific Region last September was an expression 
of our keenness to take active part in group efforts which could benefit 
all. Our present host, the Rt. Hon. Malcolm Fraser, is to be commended 
on his drive in promoting this concept and for his country's role in sustaining 
the initiative. 

Can the Commonwealth survive merely as an informal get-together? 
India believes that the Commonwealth can be invigorated by our concerted 
effort to balance and stabilize the various forces of turmoil and crisis. By 
· fonm.ilatihg the Zimbabwe Plan, the Lusaka Summit won new. respect and 
strength for the Commonwealth. This initiative had been followed up by 
some important members. The turn· of events in Southern Africa, 
in 
Namibia and Angola once again puts the Commonwealth to the test against 
the evil of racism in conjunction with exploitative vested interests. The 
whole world is warning that the days of apartheid are numbered. We cannot 
equivocate on this issue. We do not wish to interfere with or deiay any 
process which is under way but we are entitled to be informed of any plan 
of action and the time-frame. 

The Commonwealth has a valuable function in numerous areas of 
activity. At a time when news from all directions is disturbing, we must 
collectively strengthen the voice of the Commonwealth in calling for, in 
the words of the Secretary-General;·a·saner an&·more co-operative world 
order. We must revive our faith 
in solving problems by peaceful 
negotiations. We must support every effort to bring the big powers together, 
however discouraging it may seem. War cannot be left to the generals, and 
politics only to the politicians. . Peace is too serious to be left only to the 
powerful nations. India's association with the Commonwealth is consistent 
with its traditions of fostering peace and goodwill, and of working for the 
prevalence of ideals over fear, hatred and bitterness. 

The current international situation, with the re-emergence of the cold 
war, reminds me of my father's words at the 1961 Non-Aligned Conference 
in Belgrade: "First things must come first and nothing is more important 
. than this world situation of war and peace. Everything else, however 
vifal to us, has a secondary place. 
If in this crisis, something we do, some 
action of ours or some words of ours help to some extent to resolve the 
pxo:b1em, to remove the fear of war, then we have justified ourselves" . 
. : Added _to these and equally important are the global crises of food 
and. energy. As Mr Burnham (Prime Minister of Guyana) has said, Mr 

fNTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS 

Chairman, this is not the time for rhetoric. Let us put first things first and 
get on with the job. 

Indo-Soviet Friendship 
WE ARE PRIVILEGED to have in our midst today the great leader of a great 
country, a world statesman, and a trusted friend of India. I also welcome 
the other important persons who are accompanying him. 
It has been 
my privilege to know them for many years. But we regard this visit as au 
important and significant event. 
to the 
traditional friendship between the Soviet Union and India and also contribute 
to peace. 

It will add a new dimension 

The people of India have high admiration for the achievements of the 
people of the Soviet Union, particularly the. remarkable economic and 
technological progress made since the Great October Revolution under the 
immortal Lenin. "Blazing fire within the cover of ice"-this is how my 
father described the revolution to me when I was a child. We were then 
fighting our own battle against colonialism. 
In this struggle, we received 
consistant support from the Soviet people. 

Since independence, India has followed a policy of non-alignment, 
the positive content of which is to seek friendship with all countries and to 
work for goodwill and peace among nations. Twenty-five years ago in 1955 
Jawahatla!Nehru'desctibed 'peace' at a rally in Moscow in the following 
words: 

"Peace is not merely abstention from war but an active and positive 
approach to international problems and relations, leading first to the 
lessening of the present tension through an attempt to solve our problems 
by methods of negotiation, and then, to a growing co-operation between 
nations in various ways-cultural and scientific contacts, increase in 
trade and commerce, and exchange of ideas, experience and information. 
We should endeavour to remove all barriers to the growth of our minds 
and hearts such as come in the way of international co~operation". 

These words are as relevant today. The world is beset with new 
misunderstandings, new tensions, new threats. But they can and, must be 

Address at the civic reception to Mr L.I. Brezhnev, General Secretary of 'the Central 
Committee of CPSU and Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Scwiet of the 
USSR, New Delhi, December 9, 1980 

solved through recognition of distinctive personalities of nations and their 
right to freedom, and by breaking down the barriers which choke minds 
and hearts. 

We value the understanding which the Soviet Union has shown through 
the years in our problems. 
In turn, we recognize the Soviet Union's 
own concerns. 
Indo-Soviet friendship is not aimed against any other 
country. 
It is of equal importance to both India and the Soviet Union. 
Neither country has ever suught to impose its perceptions on the other. 
Yet ou1· agreement on vital issues outweighs divergence. 

Our mutual regard has manifested itself in numerous forms of co-opera-

tion. Our economic relationship has grown steadily and impressively. 
Scores of nation-building projects in India stand witness to it. Our 
scientists and technologists, our writers and artists have worked together 
. in warm comradeship. 
In the international arena, we have laboured for 
peace and . the elimination of disparities and discrimination of all kinds. 
Many have· been the attempts to create misunderstanding between us and 
to misrepresent our association. . But we have withstood ali such attempts 
and striven constantly to strengthen mutual trust.· 

To our disquiet, there is deterioration in the internationai situation. 
Detente, for which you, Mr President, have exerted yourself so tirelessly, 
has had a setback. New conflicts have erupted while old disputes still 
linger. 
I do earnestly hope that these problems will be resolved peacefully 
through political negotiations. Just and durable solutions must be found, 
and found quickly, to prevent misunderstandings from hardening 
into 
distrust and animosity. We must all work to prevent the enlargement of 
the areas of conflict and to preserve the fabric of peace. 

Many of the new tensions and conflicts are in our vicinity.· It is natur1;1.l 
for us to feel concerned. With our vital stake we have associated ourselves 
with some initiatives towards. peaceful solutions. We sincerely hope that 
the independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-aligned status 
of the countries in our region wi!Lnot come undei strain or jeopardy through 
conflicts and interference. 

We extend our hand of friendship to all countries, particularly those 

who are our neighbours. Our policy of good neighbourliness and co-opera-
tion is in the larger interests of the peoples of our area as also the rest of the 
world. 

From our newspapers you will get a picture of turmoil in our country. 
Turmoil is inevitable in this fast changing world, and specially so as we are 
still struggling on with our unfinished revolution. Our freedom movement, 
which, though very different from your own revolution, was nonetheless, 
a revolution, though peaceful arid non-violent. From the beginning we 
realized that political independence would be meaningful and enduring only., 
with economic self-reliance. The second phase of this unfinished revolution, : 
i.e., the process of combating economic inequality and social injustice, 

upsets powerful elements and invites reaction. Understandably we face 
onslaught from the 'right' and not so understandably from the so-called 
'left' as well. 
In the face of trem~ndous odds we have achieved modest 
success in giving practical shape to our ideas. W~ can say with pride that 
we have not jettisoned any of our basic tenets, commitment to an independent 
foreign policy and to the raising of the standards of living of our people 
under a socialist, secular· and democratic ethos. No matter what the 
difficulties and the dangers, we continue on our path, sometimes lonely, 
to develop the Indian personality to take sustenance from our roots, yet 
looking ahead and working with the latest in science and technology, towards 
a brighter future. Life, as our ancient texts say, is like walking on a razor's 
edge. But through the ages and the vicissitudes of history, the Indian people 
have shown balance, resilience and soundness of heart. 

Since the arrival of our distinguished guest yesterday, we have had 
a serious exchange of views on various matters of common concern to our 
two countries. As always, these talks have been characterized by candidness, 
warmth and goodwill .. This visit will demonstrate once again the :Vitality · 
of ludo-Soviet friendship; This friendship has stood the test of time. Yet, 
It is a growing and a dynamic one, with new 
it is not a static relationship. 
If I may inject a personal note, in the Soviet Union, 
vistas opening out. 
as in s01ne other countries, there are a number of 'Indiras'. 
:Many are now 
grown up and are working for the welfare of their countries. They are an 
extra link of friendship around the world. 

Excellency, we are honoured and pleased at your visit. Through you, 
we extend to the great people of the Soviet Union the friendly warm-hearted 
greetings of the Indian people. Vve wish your people and your country 
continued well-being, prosperity and new achievements in the cause of. peace. 

STATEMENT-1 

THE CHAlRVJ.AN OF the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of USSR, General 
Secretary of the Communist Party of Soviet Union, His Excellency Mr. 
Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev visited India from December 8 to 11. This was a 
visit to which both India and the USSR attached great importance and one 
which was in response to an invitation which we had extended to him in 
Belgrade last May. The visit was significant also because of international 
and regional situations. I had several opportunities of having detailed talks 
with the Soviet leader on various matters of mutual interest. At the end 
of the visit, we signed a Joint Declaration. A copy of that declaration has 
already been placed on the Table of the House. 

Statemem in Parliament regarding the visit of l\1r L.l. Bre,i:hnev to India (December 8-11), 
December 15, 1980 

We, in India, value our friendship with the Soviet Union which goes 
back to even before our independence. I participated in the celebrations of 
the 50th anniversary of the October Revolution in Moscow. Years earlier 
my father had gone to the Soviet Union as a representative of the Indian 
Nationai Congress at its 10th anniversary. The friendship, which has since 
developed, is a multi-faceted one which has benefited the peoples of the two 
countries and has contributed to world peace and stability. The socio-
economic system of our two countries are different, but we do share a 
common and abiding commitment to the strengthening of world peace. 

It was a good augury that the Soviet President should visit India in a 
year which marks the silver jubilee of Indo-Soviet economic co-operation. 
President Brezhnev is an old friend of India and has been here in 1961 and 
In many ways he has been the architect of the edifice of Indo-Soviet 
friendship. 
President Brezhnev was accompanied by a distinguished 
delegation amongst whom were Foreign Minister Gromyko and First 
Deputy Prime Minister Arkhipov, who are also our friends of long standing. 
We discussed a large nurober of questions, espedally those of direct 
. concern to our countries. We both agreed on the need for a climate of peace . 
and co-operation in our neighbourhood and for making determined efforts 
towards this end by all concerned. For, indeed, Judo-Soviet relations are 
not against any third country. 
It is a friendship that we both value greatly 
and, in our pursuit of good neighbourly relations, we ensure that ludo-Soviet 
relations are not adversely affected. More than words, our deeds bear out 
the truth of this assertion. 

On the bilateral side, our discussions were focussed on the further 
strengthening of the co-operation between our two countries. An agreement 
. on economic and technical co-operation ·which I signed with President 
:Brezl111ev provides a framework for this. The Soviet Union has agreed 
to co-operate with India in three very important sectors: power, coal mining 
and oil exploration. This is over and above the traditional co·-operation 
in ferrous metallurgy, more specifically the expansion of Bhilai and Bokaro 
and the erection of a new integra!e4 steel plant at Vishakhapatnam. The 
two sides have identified some specific projects which were left out of the 
Sixth Plan because. of lack of resources. Thanks to an offer of Soviet credit 
of Roubles 520 million-slightly under Rs. 5,200 million-these will now be 
taken up during the next five to six years. They will contribute significantly 
to the further strengthening of India's industrial sinews. 

Three more agreements were signed during the visit: 

(1) Trade agreement. 
(2) Programme on co-operation in the field of cineinatography. 
(3) Programme of cultural, sci.entific and educational exchanges for 

the year 1981-82. 

!11111 ____ ____ ,...'!""""""""'~""""'====-c==-c. 

Honourable Members will be glad to hear that in response to our 
request the Soviet Union has agreed to increase its supplies of crude oil 
to India from the current level of 1.5 million tonnes to 2.5 million tonnes 
annually and of oil products from 1.9 million tonnes to 2.25 million tonnes 
annually for the next five years. This will be against additional exports 
from India and will substantially boost our two-way trade. We appreciate 
this friendly gesture. 

Our discussions on international relations covered the world situation 
in general, and affairs in our region in some detail. On the Indian Ocean 
and on the continuing conflict between Iran and Iraq, ther,e was a close 
proximity of views. 

On Afghanistan, the views of the Soviet Union, with which the Hon'ble 
Iviembers are already familiar, were reiterated by PreBident Brezhnev .. On 
our part, we made our perceptions clear and conveyed our serious concern. 
We expressed our opposition to all forms of outside iriterftrence in the 
internal i:i.ffairs of other countries wliethei: through the induction of regular 
troops or through infilhation, and our view that. all such interference should .. 
stop in order to make possible a political solution. 

Both sides agreed that there is no alternative to a peaceful political 
solution to the problems in South-West Asia as well as to other situations 
wherever they may arise. The Soviet leader expressed the hope that India 
would continue to play her constructive role in defusing the situation and in 
helping to find peaceful political solutions. 

Continuing tensions and growing conflicts in our region have given 
outside forces an opportunity to exploit these tensions to their advantage. 
Recent years have seen a revival of efforts by certain non-littoral great 
powers to increase or consolidate their military presences in the Indian 
Ocean. There is much activity in building existing bases and in acquiring 
new bases and facilities. We have ourselves been demanding that the entire 
Indian Ocean should be freed of great power presences so that it,can become 
a zone of peace. The people of Asia and Africa can ill-afford embroilment 
in this international power game which seems to be the beginning of a new 
cold war. We have shared our concern frankly with our Soviet friends. 
We have not looked upon the situation in South-West Asia in isolation, 
either as a situation affecting this or that country or only a group of countries. 
These tensions are related to regional and global situations. The great 
powers have special responsibility in bringing about general and positive 
improvement in relations on a global scale and in this context the proposals 
made by President Brezhnev in his address to the Hon'ble Members appear 
constructive and worthy of careful consideration 

The Soviet leaders made no secret of their concern with the new escalating 
tensions in Europe and the stalemate in Central European disarmament 
negotiations: Hon'ble Members will recall that the two World Wars, the 
most devastating conflicts mankind has ever known, began on the continent 

It is, therefore, imperative that peace prevails in Europe. The 
of Europe. 
process of detei'zte in Europe contributed to the acceptance of post-war 
realities and the promotion of mutual confidence andco-operation. We 
hope that this process will recover from its recent setbacks and will be 
strengthened and extended to other regions of the globe. 

The visit of the Soviet President bas afforded us a valuable opportunity 
of reaffirming the strength and vitality of ludo-Soviet relations. These 
relations are based on trust and mutuality of interest and have therefore 
stood the test of time. Even though we may occasionally have different 
perceptions on some specific event, our friendship will prosper and we can 
continue to co-operate between ourselves and with other like-minded 
countries in our dedication to the maintenance and strengthening of worid 
peace. 

Steady Relationship 

QUESTION : The USSR and li1dia will be celebrating in April 1982 the 
35th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between 
them. How do you assess the major events and achievements of the two 
countries during this period? 

PRIME MINIST!3R: Well, as you know, there was mutual regard and interest 
between our countries even before India gained independence. 
In the 35 
years since independence a:rid since we established diplomatic relations, 
friendship between our two countries has grown steadily. The Soviet Union 
has shown understanding 9f the independent policies which India has 
pursued and particularly of our adherence to 'non-alignment. Our two 
countries have worked together in various international forums to oppose 
colonialis1n, racialism and discrimination of different kinds. What we call 
the newly-freed countries of Asia, Africa and the Caribbeans have been 
able to count on Soviet support on issues involving colonialism and its 
vestiges 

Our two countries have different political systems but the record of 
friendship between us proves the value of coexistence and co-operation 
amongst peoples regardless of their political systems. We feel that this is 
an essential precondition of peace and stability in the world. We have. 
received principled support from the Soviet Union in many moments of 
difficulty. There has also been growing economic co,operation. Today, 

Interview to the Soviet news agency TASS, New Delhi, November 26, 1981 

the Soviet Union is our largest single trading partner, We appreciate the 
help which the Soviet Union has given us in the development of our basic 
and leading industries in the State sector. The Soviet Union has also 
assisted us in various other development programmes. All over India there 
are many projects which stand as concrete and productive witnesses to this 
fruitful co-operation of Indo-Soviet technology. The recent launching of 
an Indian satellite for the second time from a Soviet launching station and 
the troposcatter link estabilshed recently between us are exflmples of new 
forms of scientific co-operation between us. Then, of course, there is growth 
in cultural relations. Authors, artists and scholars of our two countries 
have many opportunities ·of meeting and of coming closer. We hope this 
will continue. 

QUESTION : What do you think of the great contribution made by the 
outstanding leader of India, Pandit· Jawaharlal Nehru, and personally by 
you, in.development of friendly relations between our two countries?' 

PRIME IYIINISTER ; The Great October Revolution made a deep impression 
on my father, Jawaharlal Nehru. He hailed it as a major turn in human 
history. Throughout his political life he continued to be interested in the 
work of social reconstruction undertaken by the Soviet Union. He was 
also a consistent exponent of the idea that the V/est should come to terms 
with the Soviet Union and that the two should work together to maintain 
peace. Our own policy of non-alignment was intended to make a contribu-
tion towards this objective. The leaders of the Soviet Union, apart from 
correctly evaluating the policies which India had adopted, also developed 
I am glad that this has 
continued and that I have the same privilege with the Sovi~t leaders, I 
particularly value my contacts with President Brezhnev. 

· -cl-0se-bonds of personal friendship with my father. 

QUESTION : In December, it will be the twentieth anniversary of Mr Brezhnev's 
visit to India, as well as the first anniversary of Mr Brezhnev's last visit to 
India. What is your esteemed opinion about the role played by Mr-L.I. 
Brezhnev in improving the Soviet-Indian co-operation? 

PRIME MINISTER : President Brezhnev's personality and the leadership he· 
has given to the Soviet Union are well known. The people of India hold him _ 
in respect and regard him as a friend. He has contributed greatly to making 
Indo-Soviet friendship an important stabilizing factor in international life. 
The people of India will welcome any steps that your country takes under 
President Brezhnev's distinguished leadership to reduce tensions and to 
promote trust and stability in the world. 

Indians in USA 

QuESTION What are your general impressions about Indians settled in 
USA? 

PRIME }AINISTER : I believe that there are nearly 4,00,000 people of Indian 
origin in USA. It would be wrong to generalize about them. I can form 
son1e impressions about their concerns from the letters they write to me and 
from my meetings with groups of them when they visit me in Delhi. Most 
of them remain attached to India and would like to see it prosperous and 
respected in the world. This is true even of persons of Indian origin who 
have opted for US citizenship. I believe that many of them have risen in 
· their professions and have enriched.· different · aspects of · American 
life. 
·. Americans form their idea of India and its culture froin· the Indians they 
meet whether they are Amedcan or Indian citizens, who can thus contribute 
to bette1· understanding of our problems and policies. Many misconceptions 
about India are circulating. Some are unconscious but others are deliberately 
created because of our desire to follow independent policies. Unfortunately, 
some of our own people are taken in by such propaganda. 

QUESTION ; Indians abroad could bring vast amounts of foreign exchange 
into India if they could have dual citizenship in India and USA with no 
restriction on the flow of funds. 
Is it a 
political or a legal problem? 

Is dual citizenship possible? 

PRIME 11INISTER : Dual citizenship is untenable. It would create legal and 
political problems. Twq different sets oflegal rights and political obligations 
will give rise to conflicts. Dual citizenship may yield some marginal 
benefits in terms of foreign exchange and investments but the difficulties 
caused will probably outweigh them. 

QUESTION : What is the possibility of overseas Indians getting representation 
in Parliament? Overseas Indians feel that they contribute heavily in the 
form of foreign exchange remittances and they should be allowed to have 
a few seats in the Parliament. 

In the event this is not possible for legal, political or other technical 
reasons to contest elections for Parliament, what are the prospects of 
nominating some overseas Indians to Rajya Sabha? 

Replies to questions by Shri Sudershan K. Kohli of the Indian Reporter, Los Angeles, 
USA, August 7, 1981 

PRIME MINISTER : Only Indian citizens functioning in government organiza-
. tions abroad have the right to vote. Registering others would not be 
practicable. We do not wish to create an overseas Indian constituency 
by earmarking seats in Parliament. 

QUESTION : Indians in USA are gradually becoming influential and com-
mand large financial resources. To tap this technical pool of knowledge, 
would it be feasible to have advisory committees attached to different 
ministries in India? 

PRIME iv1INISTER : Suggestions and advice from Indians in the United 
. States or other countries on technical and financial matters are always 
welcome. But I doubt if it is a good idea to attach advisory committees 
to different ministries. 
Individuals and organizations abroad can write 
to my colleagues or to me through our embassies or directly. Many good 
ideas do come to us. · We also want to find out ways to enable some of our 
. experts abroad to. help our .country. · · Some doctors practising in USA ar.e 
est&,blishing hospitals where they can work by turns for short periods. 

QUESTION : For geopolitical reasons, USA has always been biased against 
India, although the degree of bias depends on what party and which 
individual is in power in USA. If the problem of Indo-US relations can be 
defined as a permanent tilt against India with the degree of tilt changing 
from time to time, how can the Indians settled in USA help in reducing 
this bias? 

PRIME MINISTER : No two peoples get along better on a personal level than 
Americans and Indians. At the go;,ernmenta.l level we do have problems. 
But on the whole even governmental relations are good. The tilt against 
India1 as you describe it, is basically a result of America's perceptions of its 
global role. As a big power the USA wants the whole world to adjust to its 
assessment of its global interests and act accordingly, if necessary adapting 
national policies. How is this possible? We have our own international 
assessments and national interests. Indians settled ju the United States can 
help by patiently interpreting the rationale and motivations of Indian policies 
to American people and policy-makers. 

The US itself was born out of a war of independence. 

It was the first 

colony to proclaim freedom. But now it seems to have become insensitive . 
to the nationalism of newly free countries in Asia and Africa. American 
policy-makers find it difficult to accept the fact that India wants to get ahead 
with solving its massive problems and cannot afford to get involved in the 
conflicts of others. But I must add that I know of many important Americans 
who do not accept the familiar stereotype view --0f India and are genuinely 
sympathetic to our endeavours. 

A Step Towards International Friendship 

WITHOUT BEING A feminist ~r a proponent of women's lib, I must confess 
that I have welcomed the election of women as Prime IVIinisters and to other 
high positions in various parts of the wolld. We live in man-made 
societies but we women believe that a better deal for women means a better 
deal for men and a higher consciousness for all human beings. So, I am 
glad that the days described by a Chinese woman in 67 5 BC, but unfortunately 
continuing into our own lifetime, are fast vanishing: 

I may walk in the garden and gather 
Lilies of mother of p1:.arl.-
Ihad a plmi would have. saved the /;tate, 
But mine are the thoughts of a girl. 

V.l e are delighted that you have found it possible to accept our invitation. 
The scope and complexity of a Prime Minister's responsibilities are now 
immeasurably more onerous. I know it is not easy to leave one's country. 
I am specially glad to welcome Mr Thatcher and your charming daughter. 
You, Prime Ivlinister, have been to India before. The present visit is brief, 
but we hope you will be able to have a wider appreciation of our achievements 
and the many obstacles to development. 

We greet you as the Prime Minister of a country which has wielded 
great influence in the w.orld and one whose voice, I hope, will still be raised 
for causes of justice arrd equality of all races and peoples. 

We applauded your personal statesmanship in solving the knotty 
Rhodesian problem, thus paving the way for elections there, "ieading to 
independence for Zimbabwe which has begun its journey to stability and 
progress. We look forward to the sru.ne wise initiative on other world 
issues. 

It is natural that your Government's views and ours should differ on 
many issues. That makes it all the more essential to meet and to find a 
measure of understanding. We, in India, believe 
in coexistence and 
co-operation. 

India's long history shows a remarkable aptitude for synthesis. Races, 
religions and ideas have come from all directions and have got woven into 
the fabric of our national life, adding colour and variety and giving strength. 

Speech at dinner in honour of the British Prime Minister, Mrs Margaret Thatcher, 
New Delki, April 15, 1981 

British influence is visible in our parliamentary, legal, administrative, even 
educational systems and in words, not only those used by the English-
speaking elite but, to a surprising degree, in our villages, too. A woman 
who had never been to a town, never heard English spokeh or seen the gan1e, 
used the word 'kirkit'. Can you guess what she meant? 
It was her village 
version of'cricket' to describe a stretch oflawn. The Beating of the Retreat, 
a truly British tradition, has become the most spectacular and popular 
part of our Republic week celebrations. 

The British have done their bit in the mixing of cultures. They took 
our people to countries near and far primarily for labour, but the enterprising 
Indians helped to open up those countries making roads, building hospitals, 
schools and banks and contributed to their economic development. Britain 
itself is the product of many ethnic streams, and in recent times the people 
of Indian origin have contributed to British economy. 
their 
industriousness and skills will continue to be regarded as a source of strength 

I hope 

·· . to your country. 

A st::'ctesman n1ust plan and work for a better future;· In countries which 
are economically backward, this n1eans making up for lost centuries. 
Sometimes the economic path itself is fairly clear. Yet, the obstacles are 
formidable. 

Progress rests 011 peace at home and abroad. 

Inequality, the gap 
between those who have and are able to use their capital, kuowledge and 
equipment to get more and those who are deprived and fall behind in the 
race, makes for discontent. Those who build tomorrow n1ay be willing to 
forego some, but certainly not all, of their immediate needs, especially as 
in developing countries such as ours. These needs are basic to survival, 
physically and to their worth as individuals. Thus, in our circumstances, 
concern.:for the economy, vital though it is, must be balanced with social 
justiee a"nd the promise of equality of opportunity. 

There is much to disturb international harmony. On the one hand, 
the growing chasm between the affluent and the developing nations; on the 
other, the increasing confrontation in attitudes and actions. Peace is the 
hinge of history today. Work for peace has to be many-sided-the ending 
of racialism and dominance, working 
together to reduce economic 
disparities, incessantly seeking political solutions to conflicts, and a 
dedicated effort for disarmament. 

The responsibility of the powerful may be greater and more direct. 
Yet, none of us dare shirk our share of it, for none of us can escape the 
consequences of failure to keep the peace. 

Recent experience has shown that military strength does not always 
prevail. There is need for the not so big nations to co111e together, to allay 
suspicions, to promote trust and create goodwill. Britain has a genius 
for conciliation and-is known to take a pragmatic view. This is yet another 
reason why we attach importance to your visit. We hope that apart from 

consolidating Inda-British co-operation, it will be a step forward in the 
work for international friendship. 

Positive and Purposeful Peace 
IT IS A privilege to welcome in our midst a distinguished parliamentarian 
and leader, The Rt.· Hon. Margaret Thatcher, Prime Minister of the 
United Kingdom. 

For two centuries Britain and India had a close though unequal and 
uncomfortable relationship. But since that midnight hour when in this 
very chamber, my father announced the birth of free India, Indo-British 
relations. ceased to be exclusive and restrictive, and were transformed into. 

. friendship ,vhich was relaxed and based on equality and. mutual respect. 

The Prime Minister has spoken of world problems as also of bilaterai · 

issues. 
In industrial development, in trade and in culture, there has been 
growing co-operation benefiting both our countries. We hope that this 
co-operation will expand and become ever more fruitful in the years to 
come. We hope that Britain and other advanced countries will enable 
developing ones to strengthen their economies through increased trade. 

The Prime Minister has also referred to the British Nationality Bill. 
This issue has evoked strong feelings amongst the Indian people and 
Parliament. It is our hope, Prime Ministe1, that with your proclaimed 
commitment to a society in which all individuals will have equal rights and 
opportunities irrespective of race, colour or creed, every effort will be made 
to ensure that 110 group has cause for grievance. 

The world cannot but look differ~ut from Delhi and from London or, 
for that matter, any other capital. Geography and history colour vision. 
Yet the endeavour of all those in positions of responsibility must be to 
bring closer the varying perceptions, and to evolve common courses of 
action. 

We, in India, have always advocated the peaceful resolution of disputes. 
In our talks you have spoken movingly of peace. Britain, with tradition 
of diplomacy and dialogue, can exert its influence for political rather than 
military solutions. 

Military solutions are short-lived, spawning new problems with long-

In contemporary wars there are 
lasting and wide-ranging consequences. 
no victors. All we know is that the weakest suffer the most. The Korea 

Speech on the occasion of the British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's address toihe 
Members of Parliament, New Delhi, April 16, 1981 

and the Vietnam coru'licts. have shown that when reasonable opportunities 
for settlement are spurned, the result is prolonged armed involvement and 
senseless loss of life and national assets. Nor is the ultimate outcome 
determined by military power. That is why we feel that advantage should 
be taken of any opening for discussion. That is why those who are called 
middle powers or small powers must act and act now to prevent a further 
deterioration of the situation. 

My Government forms its policies on principles and on our assessments 
of trends and events. We have been witness to the changing international 
scene. We are a little weary of theories of containment of one country or 
another. Far from adding to security, such concepts have resulted in 
destabilization. 'vVe are concerned only with containment of violenct' and 
racialism, of stockpiles of arms and further refinement of instruments of 
death, and of the propensity to use these for the destruction of generations 
· of the.living and the unborn, indeed of human values. 

In spite of mounting tensions, detente has maintained a foothold in · 

Europe because o(certain institutional arrangements,· but in the rest of the 
world, and especially in our region, it has broken down. 
'Ne have consistently 
pleaded for the demilitarization of the Indian Ocean. We oppose outside 
presences and interferences whether in Afghanistan or elsewhere.· The 
spectre of the cold war peeping in our doorway causes us grave apprehension. 
We have already spoken to you about the dangers of giving sophisticated 
arms to Pakistan. 

Just the other week, in this city, the non-aligned scored a minor victory. 
With all the rifts and all the pressures and dire prophesies of our breaking 
apart, we found a formula, not perfect nor satisfactory to many but accep-
table to all-in short, a consolidation of the movement and a basis for action. 
From similar small beginnings do all trends grow. 

A no less strange coming together of free nations is the Commonwealth. 
What keeps us together? The political ties are long since cut, the economic 
relations weakened by new European developments. Yet the Commonwealth . 
continues. 
Isn't it the desire fol' co-operation, the hope that what we cannot 
do singly we may be able to achieve in a group? 

How vividly I see that hour of freedom's dawn, the hopes in our hearts 
that unfolding knowledge would open the doors of opportunity. We have 
had to struggle every inch of the way; son1e programmes have actually been 
thwarted. Yet, amidst the bewildering diversity, we have consolidated 
our democratic system. Apart from our trebling grain output and building 
a diversified industry, to which you referred, our public health programmes 
have reduced child mortality significantly and curbed epidemics and diseases. 
People are now living 20 years longer. 

I do feel that all countries, whether like yours, they are allies of a big 
power or, like ours, non-aligned, must not allow differences or disagreements 
to come in the way of drawing out from the uncertainty and anger of our 

times, a more balanced and more humane world, for positive and purposeful 
peace. 

To you p~rsonally and through you to the British people, we give our 

warm good wishes. 

Festival of India 

H1sTORY BROUGHT BRITAIN and India together politically and economically. 
This relationship affected the scholars, statesmen and the common people 
of the two countries in numerous ways. Yet, for various reasons, our two 
peoples made little attempt to understand each other in depth. Perhaps 
the very inequality of the political link came in the way. Now .that the 
world situation is entirely changed and memories of that. uncomfortable .· . 
period are fading, there is· opportunity for a new effqrt cif rnutnal 
understanding. 

The Festival of India is an endeavour to present the arts of India to 
the people of Britain. The scale and the time will permit only of a quick 
glimpse into the complexity, persistence and creativity of the culture of India, 
which is remarkable for its insight into the unity of all that exists. The 
initiative for this festival came from the Prime Minister and cultural leaders 
of the United Kingdom. We appreciate this gesture and hope that tonight's 
concert, and the festival as a whole, will forge a new link in the.relationship 
between Britain and India . 

India has Friendly Feelings 

INDIA AND PAKISTAN ate independent and sovereign countries today but 
there is much that unites us. We have a shared past, many traditions 
in common and similar development problems. As neighbours, we should 
bend all our efforts to build a co-operative future, helping each other. 

Confrontation is not only needless but aggravates the difficulties· of 
our people. They yearn to escape from lives haunted by want and insecurity. 

Message sent for the Festival of India, London, September 3, .1981 . 
Message to the India News brought out by the Indian Embassy in Pakistan, Aug- 1. 1980 

They want to live in peace and under conditions of freedom and democracy, 
so that full energy can be devoted to the solution of fundamental socio-
economic problems. 

We do have problems between us but, given the will, they can be 
resolved. They should not be allowed to come in the way of our harmonious 
and friendly relations. The Simla Agreement provides basis for a bilateral 
approach to issues and for finding amicable answers. 

I am glad that the Indian Embassy in Pakistan is bringing out a news 
magazine after a lapse of ten years. 
I hope it will give the people of 
Pakistan a better understanding of India. Through the journal I should 
like to assure the people of Pakistan that the Government and the people 
of India, and I personally, have the warmest of feelings of friendship for 
them. 

India Wants Stable Pakistan 

QuESi:IoN : Madam Prime Minister, may I· begin by asking you about 
your vision of the future of India and its place in the world? 

PRIMil MINISTER : India has always played a role of peace. That is vision. 
First, of course, we have to solve our own problems. Some of those solutions 
I hope that India will always play 
are dependent on peace in the world. 
such a role. 

QUESTION : What kind of a role would you favour for your co:untry with 
special reference to the evolution of desirable state of affairs in the immediate 
region that we are Jiving in? 

PRIME MINISTER : Well, the same. You know in the immediate region we 
have very similar problems of poverty, economic backwardness, the need 
for economic development, as keeping our personalities. So, it stands to 
reason that unless there is peace and unless there is an understanding 
between us this tremendous task becomes very much more difficult. 

QUEST~ON : May I at this stage refer to the changing patterns . of power 
Isn't here a need to redefine the concept and practice 
relations in the world? 
of non-alignment? There is a feeling that it is sort of becoming ineffective, 

From the interview with Mr M.B. Naqvi of the Pakistani daily Muslim, May 2, 1981 

if not irrelevant. 
force? 

Is not there need to make it very positive, a compelling 

PR1ME! MINISTER : Who thinks that it is becoming irrelevant? 

QUESTION: Madam, it is the impression one gathers from the world Press. 

PRIME! MIN~STE!R : The world Press has always been against non-alignment. 
Since the very first meeting they have ridiculed it. They did everything 
possible-those who wrote and those who were behind them-to sow 
dissension among our peoples. But the Non-aligned Movement has survived 
all that. At the time of the very last meeting of the Foreign :tvlinisters of 
non-aligned countries, which was held in Delhi, also the world Press had 
prophesied that this would be the end of the Iv1ovement. On the contrary, 
there was. a consolidation. 
\Ve came up with a statement which though 
riot satisfactory to al], as indeed i10 statement ciin be, was acceptable to all 
and it has beeri praised by both blocs-East and West. 

QUESTION : I would very largely agree with you, Madam Prime Minister, but 
still the fact remains that the Non-aligned Movement has not been a cons-
picuous success on two issues that our region particularly has reason 
be apprehensive: one is Afghanistan and the other is the Iran-Iraq war. 

to 

PR~ME MINISTE!R : Surely, what movement or which person has succeeded? 
Now, if you think that somebody else has_ greater success, then you can say 
that the non-alignment had not succeeded. But as of now the non-aligned 
group is far closer to success than anybody else. Besides, the objective of 
this group is not to take up particular problems like these. 

QuE:SrtON : What about that part of the question about making it a little 
more active and positive? 

PRIME MINISTER : You know that in some years the movement had become 
a little more divisive and therefore weakened. This was the gain of the last 
. conference of Foreign Ministers that once again there was a feeling that 
there is a consolidation and that a base has been built for further 
action. 

QUESTION: Madam Prime l\.1inist_er, by all accounts the international situation 
in southern areas of Asia is precarious, where all manners of tensions an!l 
great power rivalries obtain. Without asking you to futuristically delineate 
the various possible scenari9s, may I request you to outline the role India 
can and should play to defuse and improve the situation in three or four 
sub-regions? 

PRIME MINISTER : As I said earlier, India has been consistently playing the 
role of peace and we are greatly interested in peace in our region, certainly 
in Asia as well as in other parts of the world. One of the reasons for the 
birth of the Non-aligned Movement was this-the tension between certain 
power groups and big power rivalries. This is why we feel that the Non-
aligned Movement is as relevant today as it has ever been, if not more so, 
because it is something that tries to defuse these tensions. 

QUESTION : At this point, !viadam Prime Minister, I would like to bring in 
the specific question of Indo-Pakistan relations. How do you view 
the 
prospects of these relations in the long term, in the meclium term, in the 
current situation? 

PRIME MINISTER : I would not prophesy. I can only say that I have very 
sincerely hoped that the Simla spirit will not only ·survive but :will grow 
because, I think, that is the only basis for- peace in this n::gion in the larger · 
ter111 of the word. . As I staied in reply to your earlier question, \-Ve have . 
largely similar problems. Vie are also being used directly or indirectly in 
other people's quarrels. And we as voices of the people of the sub-continent, 
and of Asia as a whole, can be felt by · the rest of the world only if there 
is much greater understanding and co-operation between ourselves. 

QUESTIO'.'< : In the present situation, what is your assessment of the Simla 
spirit? 

Is it any stronger today? 

PRIME Jvl!NISTER : I think it is a bit weak at the moment. This is why we have 
asked our Foreign Minister to go there. 

QUESTION : May I ask a little question, indiscreet one I suppose, for a 
pressman? 

Is he going with something positive? 

PRIME MINISTER : I don't know what you mean by positive. I hope we never 
think of something negative. There is no specific proposal. 

QUESTION : What concrete steps, Madam Prime Minister, can be adopted 
by your Government? 

PRIME MINISTER : We are constantly trying to see that the cllmate does 
improve. 

QUESTION: Does that answer, Madam Prime Minister, include the steps that 
yoi.1 propose to take in the immediate future? 

PRIME MINISTER -:- Steps can only be mutual. We can talk to the Government 
I do not think one can just mention something in the air here. 
of Pakistan. 

QUEST~ON: Before going on to the various specific problems to be resolved 
between India and Pakistan, I would like to interpose, Madam Prime 
Minister, the Afghanistan problem. The Russian intervention there, and 
as in the view of many students of strategy, greatly altered the security 
perceptions throughout South Asia. 
I know of Pakistan where it has. 
How about India's security perceptions? Have they been affected, if at all? 

PRlME M,NISTER: Well only in general sense that any tension which is closer 
to us affects us. 
If you mean by this question that you think that Soviet 
Union is going to attack Pakistan, well I do not agree. But we have made 
our views very clear what we think about any intervention in any country. 
But usually people from the West pick out the Russian intervention. Now, 
how many other interventions have there not been by others? 
\Vhat is 
happening in the Indian Ocean? You cannot separate one particular event, 
however bad or _unfortunate it may be, from the others because it is a long 
history of each person tryingto go one step further. And this sort of thing 
. is not happening only in Asia, it is happening in Latin America also .. 

QuEST~ON : So it is. What I was interested in was that one has read in various 
books on the subject that from the very strictly defence point of view, the 
peninsular India or the historical India was always regarded as a sort of 
unit wherein the inroads by foreign forces, by forces I do not mean military 
forces; were regarded as detrimental to the security interest of the area. Does 
that view still hold ground in India? 

PR~ME" MIN~STER : I haven't quite understood. But if we face whatever 
dangers there are together, we will be stronger. 

QuBsnoN : You mean the countries of the sub-continent? 

PR~MB MINISTER : All the countries. Well, I would say all of Asia really, 
if that was possible. 
If it is not immediately possible, perhaps some time 
it will be. But you see any kind of attempt at just being against something 
always brings a reaction. and that is why the world is in the present position. 

QuEsTtoN : I do not have any military moves on the part of ... 

PRIME M~NISTBR : No, I also do not speak of any military moves. Even 
otherwise if you have any kind of combination that people can think is 
against some kind of grouping or alignment, then it gives an excuse to other 
people to do what is not desirable militarily or otherwise .. 

. . QuEST~ON : Well, a corollary to the· question, Madam Prime :rviinister, is 
where do you fit Pakistan into this larger picture of the present security 
environment of this part of the world? 

PRIME MINISTER : Well, I have always said that we want a stable and strong 
Pakistan. This applies to all the other countries which are our neighbours. 
One of the aims of the Non-aligned Movement is that each country should 
be strong and stable in itself and safeguard its independence. 

QUESTION : You have mentioned, Madam, a while ago about the desirability 
of having a strong and stable Pakistan. Taking Pakistan as it is, what would 
you like to say or do which would contribute to the strengthening and 
stability of Pakistan? 

PRIME MINISTER : I do not think that we are in a position to do much. That 
is something which your own Government and people must think out. The 
way we have built our strength was not to the liking of many people outside 
but it is succeeding for us, and our main point was that we should be 
self-reliant. 

QurisTION: I am conscious that a number of Indian writers and politicians . 
have been emphasising the threat that Pakistan would become stronger, I 
am referl"ing to the arms purchased ·by Islamabad. Do you think that a 
few more planes and guns in Pakistani hands would pose a threat that would 
override all basic, strategic and long-term· advantages of befriending 
Pakistan as a trusted, friendly neighbour, essential to India's long-term 
interests? 

PRIME MINISTER : We think that Pakistan as a trusted, friendly neighbour 
would be a very great advantage to India and, I think, to Pakistan also. 
I have never criticized merely the arms that Pakistan is getting. But what 
are the motivations at this point, and also how will thos.e arms b~ used. 
Why are people worried? When ever I have spoken on this subject l have 
always -put it in the larger framework that we do not want an arms race. 
Today, the armament industry seems to be dominating all other industries 
in many parts of the world. Thisis a danger. Confrontation is there in 
many parts. In our neighbourhood there is actual war to which you referred 
earlier and there are many other tensions. Now at this point, if there is 
an increase in arms, it obviously increases tension. 

QUESTION : In the case of Pakistan the reason I know of is that they have 
antediluvian arms and need to replace some, and even these are likely to be 
coming to them, if at all, some two years from now or so. And the 
quantum is for the world to see. 

PRIME MINISTER : Well, that we do not know. Everybody does not always 
know what is happening. 

QUESTION : Does that warrant in your view the amount of reaction that it 
has elicited in India? 

PRiME MINISTER : You know, most people think that the reaction has been 
very mild. Even the Americans felt so. On the other hand, when something 
has happened in India, the Pakistani Press and quite responsible people have 
gone absolutely overboard in projecting it, well, in not a very correct light. 
I am not saying that we should respond in the same way, and we have not. 
But I do not think that Pakistan's getting very sophisticated weapons at 
this time is going to strengthen Pakistan in any way at all. 

QUESTION : At this point, :Madam Prime Minister, I would like to bring in 
the question of the nuclear bomb and the capabilities. 
Indian newspapers 
are full of stories of the Pakistani Bomb or Islamic Bomb, the source of which 
in my view is dubious. But, as a point of departure, one can assume that 
as a result of the· nuclear research programme it can some time in future 
acquire what is called a capability to explode a nucleai· device. · Would 
that iri. your view be synonymous wfrh po;;sessing the bomb? 

PRIME MINISTER : No. Just an experiment would not. 'whether the sources 
are dubious or not, I cannot say. But the information is not that there will 
be nuclear capability but actually making of bombs. Now, that does change 
the overall situation; and again as to tension, we know that there are a 
lot of people interested in this. 

QUESTION : Do you mean outsiders? 

PRIME MINISTER : Also outsiders, I think. 

QUESTION : Madam Prime Minister, now what ,vould Pakistan's possession 
of nuclear capal?ilities, such as India has possessed since 1974, do to the 
ludo-Pakistan relations? Could it not be made an occasion for to try and 
hammer out a new relationship of trust and co-operation for larger needs 
that you have in mind. The basic assumption I am making is that you 
can't, on account of Pakistan having followed a policy you do not favour, 
afford not to record Pakistani co-operation in the common concern of 
South Asia and forcing it to look for friends in distant places. 

PRIME MINISTER : I am very sony but that is not factually correct. 
It is 
quite true that we do not favour military dictatorships and things like that. 
But we believe in coexistence. We have not let this stand in the way of 
attempting friendship with Pakistan. Perhaps, you will reme.mber that it 
It was an extremely difficult 
was I who took the initiatives at that time. 
time in which to propose one that we should have a unilateral withdrawal 

from Pakistan and later on to invite 1Yir Bhutto here. 
It was not a popular 
thing to do, either amongst the people or amongst the politicians. Even 
those who are today championing the cause of Pakistan somewhat loudly-
and I can put it tha,t way-none of them wanted it at that time. But it 
is because I kept this aim, which you have mentioned, that we have common 
concerns and friendship is the basic necessity that I stuck my neck out, so 
to speak, and I still think, it was the right thing to do. As a result of that 
effort that we have diplomatic relations with Pakistan; we have not gone as 
far as we had hoped but certainly relations are better than they had been 
before that. 

QUESTION : No, what I have in my mind on the nuciear question is that it 
is likely to have some consequences in the relationship. 
·would that be not 
an occasion for you to make some such similar try? 

\Vhy do you have to 
PRIME Iv1INISTER : There will be occasions all the time. 
wait for something i:o happen? The occasion to try for friendship is a 
. continuous process. 

QUESTION : True. 
It is very true. But that might be a little more compelling 
action when the need for such a need might be recorded with greater 
degree? 

PRIME MINISTER : You see, earlier you mentioned our re.action in India 
and it is true th~t amongst the people the reaction is very sharp. 
\Ve had 
a hard time in Parliament as well as Consultative Committees and various 
other Committees of Parliament, but your own Government's pronounce-
ments make it very difficult. A;t no time we would stand in the way of any 
of Pakistan's legitimate needs !Jf defence or anything else. 
It is because 
they get combined with a particular attitude 
that misgivings and 
apprehensions arise in people's minds. 

QUESTION : Am I right in concluding that you would respond favourably 
if there were some kind of an 
initiative from Pakistan for a greater 
understanding? 

PRIME MINISTER 
attitude. 

It is not a question of initiative. 

It is a question of 

QUESTION : Well, Madam, rightly or wrongly the impression that has spread 
in Pakistan is that you are somewhat cold and distant towards Pakistan and 
that you are only concerned with making India a great power. This has 
fuelled the old mistrusts and fear of India's true intentions. How do you 
wish to dissolve this feeling? 

PRIME MINISTER : As I said, if this was true, why would we have taken all 
the trouble (of returning territory and POWs)? At that moment, hardly 
anybody stood with me when I said that we must have peace with Pakistan. 
But at that moment I stretched out a hand of friendship and that remains. 
Furthermore, I have said many, many times I do not believe in this idea 
of great power or any type of power. We are trying to strengthen India 
in every possible way but only so that we have the capability of solving 
the problems of our own people. We feel our independence is not complete 
till we have given the people more economic independence and the opport-
unity to grow to their full stature and we find that the experience of other 
countries shows that you cannot do it unless you have a base of self-reliance. 
That is why we are working so hard towards it. 

QunsnoN : Do you think that you will take an initiative that would appeal 
to the popular imagination in Pakistan? I take it that you wish to see 
. good relations· bet.yeen India and Pakistan. Is it not time for your 
.Government to take some bold steps to improve this climate? 

PRIME MINISTER : Well, if you suggest something, we will see if it can be done. 

QUESTION : There could be some unilateral move even if the other side 
is not coming up with a concrete proposal. 

PRIME MINISTER : But just saying something and not getting it done does 
not always help the situation. This is why we are trying to keep the dialogue 
going on in the hope that something will emerge from the dialogue, someth-
ing helpful. 

QUESTION : Well, on the subject of improving the climate of relations in 
the region, I would like you to give your ideas on the subject of a political 
solution of the Afghanistan crisis. What in your view should be the way 
that Pakistan should go about this business and what initiatives can India 
take, 
if things were propitious, and how these things can be made 
propitious? 

PRIME MINISTER : I am afraid this is a very difficult question because 
I think if people had seen it in right 
Afghanistan has got bogged down. 
perspective, it would have been easier to solve. But, as I said, most countries 
look at it as an isolated case. We do not see a sin1ilar outcry about similar 
situations in other parts of the world. Now, all we can do and which we 
are doing is to talk to various people and to try and keep in touch with the 
situation. The Soviets say Pakistan started interfering first and is encouraging 
infiltrators and so on. They even said that if only Pakistan stops interfering, 
they will be able to come out. 
I know that Pakistan has denied interference. 

QUESTION : Madam, giving the power equations between Soviet Union and 
·Pakistan, is it conceivable that Pakistan would like to do that kind of thing? 

PRIME MINISTER : Well they are not directly fighting with the Soviet Union, 
are they? And I don't think in the heart of hearts they think there is a 
danger of the Soviet Union retaliating militarily or in any other way. 

QUESTION : I foresee any number of options open to the Soviet Union which 
can be very hurtful to Pakistan short of any military action. Vvithout any 
military action they are in a position to make life ve1y difficult for Pakistan. 
And anyone who does that ought to know what the possibilities are. 
This is one reason why I think that a political solution ... 

PRIME IvlINISTER : We all want a political solution. 

· QUESTION : A slightly more active role from you might be helpful. 

PRIME lvl:INISTER : 'Nell, we are being as active as we ca:n. 

QUESTION : Here, may I take an overview of the economic situation that 
obtains in India and also in the region? 
India's achievements in this field 
are spectacular and yet the problem of people living below the poverty line 
It is defying solution. Similar is the case with 
is far from being solved. 
other sub.continental countries. There 
talk of economic 
co-operation in the region which will make a greater contribution to the 
prosperity of all. What are 
the economic concomitants of such a 
co-operation and how does your Government propose to create 
those 
e.onditions.in which regional co-operation may really have a chance? 

is much 

PRIME Iv1INISTER : First, I would like to say that the problem of poverty is 
not defying solutions. On the contrary, we are reaching out to the people. 
Only it takes time. We have nothing like the poverty that we used to have. 
And I have travelled a very great deal and specially when I was out of power 
I had to go mostly by road. So, I went to quite remote places and I saw 
nothing that I had seen even ten years earlier. So, these problems are 
being solved. But, of course, with every day people's awareness is more 
sharp and they want that we should go much quicker. They want more 
things. Their needs are increasing also day by day. Whereas people once 
were content with one meal a day, it is insufficient now. 
It is not sufficient 
and rightly so. But it is not true to say that poverty is defying solution. 
Unfortunately, in between when there is any kind of other trouble, the 
poor suffer more. Sometimes there is a slackening. Sometimes people 
in authority-are not so interested in these programmes. But the problems 
are so gigantic. 
there has been 

In Asia, Africa and Latin America, 

tremendous interference fron1 outside and that is continuing. 
It takes 
different forms and now they are. much more subtle than they used to be. 
There are groups of people who indulge in activities that retard progress 
and which divert money from the basic things to just ensuring normalcy. 
But economic co-operation is essential, and that is \Vhy in the Non-aligned 
Movement, previously we had been laying far greater stress on the economic 
aspect. This was a way of binding people together. 
It was afterwards, 
when more politics came in, that the movement weakened and the differences 
in people's views came to the fore. I think that many of us in the developing 
world are in a position to help others, although we need help ourselves and 
- in the Non-aligned :1VIovement it is our policy to strengthen these economic 

links. 

QUESTION : I was more particularly interested in the political pre-conditions 
that go with regional economic co-operation. You did mention obliquely 
the foreign influences that are keeping the people disunited and away from 
co-operating. Are there not other requirements of a political nature? 

PRIME MINISTER : Obviously, if there was political understanding, economic 
co- operation would be much closer. But I would say that the right way is 
to find out whatever co-operation there is, then try to enlarge it. 

QUESTION : I was thinking of the possible framewo_rk within which economic 
co-operation could be pushed forward, expanded a.s well as intensified. 

PRIME MINISTER : That is something that can't be done just unilaterally. 
It is something that has to be worked out inch by inch. 

QUESTION : True, but some kind of original inspiration or vision can be held 
out before working towards it begins. 

PRIME MINISTER: You see, first the Government of Pakistan must also feel 
that our interests are largely complementary. Unfortunately, they have 
always regarded us with suspicion, as you said. Now, it is true we are a 
big nation but size can be a liability. 

It is not always a strength. 

QUESTION : There could be ways. 

PRIME MINISTER : \Ve are always searching for those ways. 

QUESTION : There have been many statements in India about the clouds of 
war hovering over the horizon of South Asia. This kind of talk is creating 
.altogether a new fear psychosis in Pakistan where India's position towards 
Pakistan's purchase of arms is misunderstood as a desire to keep Pakistan 

weak and vulnerable. How will that help India unless it is a way of papering 
over domestic crises? Also, the overall security environment seems to have 
gravely worsened. 

PRIME 11INISTER : I don't know about Pakistan, but I can assure you there 
is no desire for papering over any domestic crisis. We have to deal with 
each as it arises and solve the problems which give rise to them. So far 
as the talk about clouds of war, they are not found in India. 
India has been 
visited by a very large number of statesmen and officials from foreign 
countries and I can tell you that all of them have expressed their deep 
concern over this. Not between India and Pakistan-but the whole world. 
There does seem to be a greater concentration in our region because of the 
one war that is already being fought. Also, there are many outstanding 
problems that have been there for long. Because you say that India's 
remarks about Pakistan arms are being misunderstood, it is for you and the 
Government of Pakistan to clear this misunderstanding. A country cannot 
be strong merely by the accretion of arms. Strength is in the people. 
do not wa1it to quote historical examples. You cab. have ail other strength 
but if the foundation of a strong people is not there, then it does not help. 
In. fact, ii can become a danger to the country itself. This is how we see 
the situation. 
\Ve don't want this area to be caught up in global strategy 
and global rivalries. Vve think that is a greater danger. Vie are not · 
afraid of Pakistan having arms, or Pakistan attacking us. We can deal 
with ir. But when once Pakistan becomes a part of these strategies then I 
think it becomes much more dangerous. 

QUESTION : The misunderstanding I was referring to was that an impression 
has been gathel'ed that ... 

PRIME :MINISTER : But I think the impression is deliberately created. 

QUESTION : But it is widespread enough. Our people get hurt that the 
Indian Government doesn't let the Pakistan people decide what level of arms 
they need and want to have. 

PRIME MINISTER : Now, how are we interfel'ing with your decision? We 
are giving our point of view as we give on many issues. But, after all, it is 
for you to decide. 
\Ve are just saying that experience has shown that 
this is not strengthening the country. And I would like to assure the people 
of Pakistan of the fund of goodwill which exists in India towards them, as 
any Pakistani visitor can see for himself. 
I can also assure you that this 
extends to the Government. The Government has goodwill and a feeling 
of concern. for the people of Pakistan and, as I have said in reply to several 
of your questions, we feel that a stable Pakistan and the progress of its 
people is as much in India's interest as it is in Pakistan's. 

Homages, Tributes 

·.·•.and .... 
Reminiscences 

M.A. Ansari 
IT rs A privilege to participate in this function and to have the opportunity 
of paying tribute to one of the luminous stars in the firmament of our 
nationalist movement. The second reason is more personal. Dr Ansari 
was a very close friend and comrade of my grandfather and father. He was 
like a member of our family. He is part of my childhood memories ... 
Dr Ansari entered politics at the top. Even at a young age, he had 
established a formidable reputation in the 1nedical profession. A special 
characteristic of the Gandhian movement was that it attracted leaders of 
different professions· alongside the humble and 
the nameless, the most 
outstanding intellects as also utterly unsophisticated people. My grand0 
father and Shri C:.R. Das abandoned their legal practice to follow . the ·· 

· .· Mahatma. . Dr Ansari, the brilliant doct~r, became a Satyagrc1hi. He was 
a front-rank leader of the Khi!afat movement and founder of the Delhi 
Pradesh Congress. Vlithin the Congress; his counsels commanded the 
greatest respect. The nation accorded him the highest honour that was 
in its power in the days of colonial rule by making him the President of the 
Indian National Congress. 

He was a person of unimpeachable integrity. 

In his own life, he was 
a bridge between the old world r.nd the new, between tradition and modernity, 
between Hindus and Muslims. He was incapable of any narrowness. 

Many early memories come back to me. J remember his house in Delhi. 
It was there that the famous photograph of me with Mahatma Gandhi was 
takenin 1924 duringGandhiji'sfast. Dr Ansari'shospitality was proverbial. 
He made no distinction between high and low. Every genuine national 
worker was a valued guest to him ... Today, we need -once again the 
qualities which Dr Ansari personified-his deep compassion and humanity, 
his sense of dedication, total freedom from fanaticism, his intense respect 
for persons from other religions and other callings, his internationalism 
and his sheer goodness. 

From speed1 at the function held to inaugurate the birth centenary celebrations of the late 
Dr Mukhtar Ahmad Ansari, a noted physician and national 
leader, New Delhi, 
March 26, 1980 

Victoria Ocampo 
As A YOUNG woman, I studied for a few months in Rabindranath Tagore's 
then I had heard of Tagore's 
university, 
Argentinian follower, Victoria Ocampo. The poet had given her the 
Sanskrit equivalent of her name and addressed poems to Vijaya. Years 
earlier, she had nursed him through a long illness and done much to 
understand and interpret him. 
ing figure of Latin American literature. 

In later years she was to become an outstand-

the Visva-Bharati. Even 

Rabindranath Tagore, Mahatma Gandhi and Jawaharlal Nehru-all 
three were distinctive expressions of India's national renaissance. Tagore 
the poet, and Gandhi the ascetic, were very different in aspect and tempera-
ment, but were attached to each other; and Nehru drew his inspiration 
from both, combining eiements of their thinking. While being intensely .· 
Indian; they were no chauvinists; and their outlook embraced the whole 
humanity. This is why they also attracted·· friends and foliowers from 
other lands. It is no surprise that Victoria Ocampo translated into Spanish 
the writings of all three. 

It was a great pleasure to visit her in her beautiful riverside home twelve 
It was 
years ago. The house was full of mementoes of her love for India. 
I had the privilege to present to her a degree 
almost an Indian~~hrine. 
from Tagore's university. 
I recall my conversation with her. Her sensitive 
face, her calm bearing, her soft voice carried marks of the battles she had 
fought on behalf of courtesy and culture in a world so ready to wound and 
desecrate. Her courage turned to compassion without compromisi.'l.g 
with wrong. She had that sign of the soul's true refinement-to make 
light of one's own ordeals, to forgive the unforgivable. 

We had very much hoped that Victoria Ocampo would visit India so 
that we could demonstrate to her how greatly we appreciated her lifelong 
attachment to our land. But that was not to be. We had to be content 
with expressing our gratitude from afar. During the International 
Women's Year we remembered some women of other nations who had 
befriended our country, and her name occupied a high place on the list. 

She wrote to me a few times. They were a poet's letters-wise, true, 
beautiful and concerned with mankind's fate. Through them I could 
surmise what a force she must have been in Spanish literature. It is 
appropriate that Sur, which Victoria Ocampo built up, should publish a 
special issue devoted to her. I join her other friends and admirers in paying 
tribute to her memory. 

Message sent to Madam Maria Renee Cura of Buenos Aires, Argentina, April 13, 1980 

Josip Broz Tito 

INDIA IS DEEPLY grieved to learn of the passing away of Marshal Josip 
Broz Tito, a giant of our time. 

Yugoslavia has lost its greatest son. The world will miss his towering 

presence and his sense of mission. 

My association with Marshal Tito goes back over many years when, 
at a critical juncture in the post-war period, he and my father Jawaharlal 
Nehru laid the foundations of non-alignment, providing a forum for, and 
giving direction to, the newly independent countries of Asia, Africa and the 
In my many meetings with President Tito, at home and abroad, 
Americas. 
I came to value greatly his clear vision, his profound understanding of world 
forces, and his sincere concern for developing countries, not merely for their · 
economic progress hut even more for their. attaining and maintaining true 
independence, without being involved in the rivalries of the super-powers. 
He \Vas 110 less concerned with the. unity and destiny of his own country 
where he aimed at elegance and excellence in all spheres. 

President Tito was held in high esteem and affection in India as the 
leader of the friendly Yugoslav people, an outstanding world statesman, 
and a maker of history. His sage counsel has guided the Non-aligned 
Movement through some of its turbulent years. 

On behalf of the Government and the people of India, and speaking 
for myself, I offer. to Your Excellency and through you to the members of 
your Government and the people of Yugoslavia our heartfelt condolences. 
May I also request Your Excellency to convey my most sincere 

condolences and sympathy to members of the bereaved family. 

Rai Krishna Dass 
'I AM GRIEVED to hear of Rai Krishna Dass's death in Varanasi. He was 
a pioneer art historian and critic. Throughout his long life he worked to 
create greater awareness of our great heritage of art and the need to 
preserve it. 

Message of condolence sent to the President of the Federal Executive Council of the 
Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, Mr Veselin Djuranovic, May 5, 1980 
Message of condolence on the passing away of Shri Rai Krishna Dass, a noted art historian, 
at Varanasi, July 22, 1980 

A man of generous disposition, he shared his insights and enthusiasm 
with younger artists and critics, to whom he gave unfailing guidance. Several 
museums owe a debt of gratitude to him. No less notable were his services 
to Hindi letters. The country loses a·savant who was a fine representative 
of our traditional culture. 

Mohammed Iqbal 
I AM VERY happy that we arc marking today the culmination of the 
Iqbal Centenary with a bouquet of the lofty thoughts of important litterateurs 
and writers in the form of a beautiful book. 
. The Centenary . has been celebrated all over the ·country with great 
eclat and the Government of India also co-operated fully. This is as . 
it ought to be because Iqbal was a po~t of India, a standard-bearer of our 
great literary traditions. He is among those great poets, not only of India 
but of the world, who have left their deep impress on the whole race and 
identified themselves with the woes, worries and aspirations of their times. 

Despite some differences, how can we forget that it was he who gave 

us that famous lyric of liberty: 

"Saare Jahan Se Achcha, Hindustan Hamara ... " 
("India, better than all the world ... ") 

How can we forget that in his Saki Nama, he sorrowfully: described 
the silk-mak~rs and artisans of Kashmir and thus gave a proof of his love 
for the downtrodden classes? 

He took pride in being the son of a Kashmiri Brahmin. He admired 
In Naya Shivala, 

Lord Krishna's philosophy of disinterested action. 
he expressed his deep devotion for India in these words: 

"Every speck of the motherland's dust 

is for me a deity." 

We admire Iqbal also because he was a poet of human liberty and 
progress. Everlasting love, unending quest and endeavour was his slogan. 
In his heart, he bore great respect for the yearnings and aspirations of 

English rendering of speech at the function held to release the Iqbal Commemorative 
Volume, New Delhi, September 10, 1980 

mankind. How can the world's darkness be removed without distinguishing 
between good and evil? 

The Creator has given this world to mankind as a trust and how 

man protects and nurtures this divine trust is a test for him. 

Iqbal wrote powerful and incandescent poems against slavery and 
imperialism and invited not only India but the whole of West Asia to revolt. 
He exhorted his compatriots to overthrow the yoke of British imperialism, 
and said that even if it be a single moment of liberty, it is worth more than 
a year of slavery. 

While pondering over Iqbal's thoughts on Muslim politics, it should 
be borne in mind that at that time the Muslim wo:dd was in the shackles of 
imperialism. 
\Vhatever Iqbal said to give it courage and strength has 
to be viewed from that angle .. 

My father wrote that Iqbal, in his last days, was beginning to lean 
towards socialism. When iliness made Iqbal confined to bed, he sent foi: 
him (Jawaharlal Neluu) and they talked about many things. 
It was then 
. that Nehru realized how easy it was to ·get on with Iq bat irr spite of differences. 
· According to Iqbal, . religion unites· and not divides men. He looked 
at religion in terms of human and moral values. For half a century, we 
have. been hearing his words: 

"Religion does not teach mutual hatred. 
'vVe are Indians and India is our motherland." 

The riots and disturbances taking place today were started with some 
ulterior motive, but now they have taken the form of communal hatred and 
enmity. 
\Vhat is at the back of these riots? We should ask this question 
and n1ake every effort to restore peace and ensure the'.:safety of people's lives 
and property. 
If the country so dear to us is weakened, no party, no group 
or individual can escape the consequences. And this is the message which 
Iqbal has left for us in his poetry. 

A poet's profundity cannot be gauged with an ordinary scale. He is 
like a cup that is continually replenishing itself and overflowing. 
Iqbal is 
claimed not by us alone but also by others. Like Pakistan, Iran and Arab 
and other Asian countries, India also offers tribute to Iqbal as a great poet, 
not of India alone, but of Asia as a whole. 

With these few words, I congratulate the members of the Iqbal Centenary 
Committee, and particularly :tvlr Ali Sardar Jafri, on publishing this beautiful 
comn1emorative volume and thus making it possible to take Iqbal's message 
to a very wide circle . 

Nelson Mandela 
I AM NOT really supposed to address this gathering and you will have 
noticed that my name is not on the programme. But sometimes I feel 
that the occasion demands that I say at least a few words, and this is one 
of those occasions because I do want to pay my own tribute to Nelson 
Mandela and to all the valiant groups of people who have been struggling 
through the years for what is man's acknowledged and undeniable right-to 
live in freedom and to shape his future. 

Wherever people care for freedom and human dignity, Nelson Mandela's 
name is known and respected. But he himself is today being denied both 
freedom and dignity in his own home. He is confined to Robben Island, 
locked in a cell, facing the loneliness and frustration, missing his loved .ones 
· and; above all, impatient at not being able to get on with the fight outside. 
Yet, wherever he is, there too is the struggle. Thoreau said that in 
l\1any of us here, as 
oppressive regime, a free man's place is in prison. 
Indians who are here, have had personal experience of this. 

The white man's burden has too long been carried on the shoulders 
of the black and the brown. A struggle for freedom can be suppressed, 
its soldiers killed, imprisoned, humiliated, but the idea of freedom cannot 
be stamped out, some spark will persist to burst into flame somewhere some 
time to light the way and illumine hearts and ultimately iead to success. 
Neither colour nor caste nor sex makes one person superior or inferior. 
No matter what laws South Africa devises for itself, history cannot be denied 
nor will the inexorable march of tne future pe halted. Apartheid cannot 
survive. 

It is appropriate that the Nehru Award should go to Nelson Mandela. 
How happy we here and the people of India would have been to receive him! 
We had hoped that in his place we would have the pleasure of greeting his 
wife, Mrs Winnie Mandela. But that was not to be. She is refused permis-
sion even to travel within her country. We feel that Mr Mandela is with 
us in spirit, as is my father, on this occasion. 
.Mahatma Gandhi's close 
connection, my father's deep concern and my own visit to South Africa and 
involvement since pre-independence days give me a special closeness with 
your struggle which we have consistently supported and continue to do, 
for we stand here and elsewhere for human freedom, human dignity, human 
equality and justice. 

Speech at the function held to confer the Jawaharlal Nehru Award for International 
Understanding for 1979 on the South African freedom fighter, Mr Nelson Mandela 
(i11 absentia), New Delhi, November 14, 1980 

H.O:MAGES, TRIBUTES AND REMINISCENCES 

We welcome you, President Tambo, as Mr Mandela's representative 

and as representative of the resurgent spirit of Africa. 

Welthy Fisher 

I\1Rs WELTHY FISHER was a wonderful woman. Beautiful, efficient, 
enthusiastic and energetic, she lived life to the hilt. At Gandhiji's request 
she threw herself whole-heartedly into literacy work and put hundi·eds of 
thousands of young women on their feet. She loved and served India. 
I am glad to have known her and to count her amongst my friends. 

G. V. Mavalankar 
IT GJVES ME a great pleasure to release this stamp on Shri Mavalankar. As 
the previous speakers have said, he was one of the leading lights of the first 
years of freedom who gave guidance to Parliament and to our democracy. 
As the Speaker told you just now, my father called him 'Father of Parliament', 
and at that time I know how much the Members looked up to him for his 
loving, considerate advjce and guidance he gave to them. As the first 
Speaker of independent Iridia's Parliament, he laid down healthy conventions 
in the formative stages of Parliament. These were rather difficult times 
and difficult conditions. 
It is largely due to the conventions whieh he set 
up that Parliament was able to proceed peacefully and with dignity even 
after he left us. 

I should like to quote my father on him. He said: "Throughout his 
early days-difficult days, formative days-it was Shri Mavalankar who sat 
as the guiding deity, helping us, chiding us, trying to keep us on the right 
path, laying down and n1aking precedence to be followed later and moulding 
the development of parliamentary life of India, of course, mostly in the 
Lok Sabha". Later he said: "I must confess that I, and I think perhaps some 

Tribute to Mrs Welthy Fisher, a noted worker in the field of adult education, New Delhi, 
December 17, 1980 
Speech at the function held to release the commemorative postage stamp in honour of the 
late Ganesh Vasudeo Mavalankar, first Speaker of the Lok Sabha, New Delhi, 
February 27, 1981 

othei<s, got t,o much used to Shri Mayalankar as ,-our 8-peaker and had come 
to rely so much on the way he. could deal with ai:iy sitiiation that might arise. 
with calmness, with courtesy and at the same time with firmness that we 
could hardly think of this Parliament without him." 

He was an inseparable part of it, the cementing link between us all. 
But, of 'course, I think that-although at that time people thought those were 
difficult days-Sb.ri Mavalankar did not have to face the difficulties that, 
for instance, our present Speaker or for that matter our Chairman has to 
face, neither the noise nor even the type of defiance that one sometimes 
faces. 

Parliament is a bulwark of democracy. And, therefore, Parlia1nent has 
not only the great responsibility of passing legislation but also of discussing 
important items-. everybody, all parties and all types of opinions participating 
It has also a very heavy 
in any such del;,ate and discussions and decisions. 
task of projecting an image that will gain it respect of the people because 

·· . if that is lost,. then, I .do not know what could happen later. 

Democracy gives privileges to every individual in the .counfry; but, 
as Gandhiji said so often, every privilege has its correspondi1ig duties, and 
I think that is equally true of the Members of Parliament as of anybody 
else. Democracy demands· tolerance, understanding, mutual respect and 
adjustment. The Government and the Opposition, being important partners 
in national progress, an integral part of the democratic system, must learn 
to live together and to respect one another. As I have said many times 
that while it is a legitimate function of the Opposition to criticize the 
Govermnent so that its performance is kept at a high level and is improved 
wherever such improvement is needed, it must be ,ren1embered that the1·e is 
a third party, a supreme party, and that is the people of India. 

Ali: of us who are elected <Lre responsible to Parliament and also to the 
larger parliament which is outside around the world, which is quite clear, 
of the people there. So, in our behaviour inside ?.r outside we have to keep 
this in view and I sincerely hope that all Members, irrespective of the party 
to which they belong, will feel themselves duty bound to serve the people 
and to keep this good image of the Parliament. They should not forget that 
they are being constantly watched by the people, especially the younger 
people. Nothing should be done which can in any way bring down the dignity 
or the decorum of our two Houses. 

The privileges of Parliament exist to enable Men1bers to make contribution 
freely and fearlessly. As I said earlier, 11.0 privilege should be used in such 
a. way that it nullifies itself. .. We must all conduct ourselves with restraint 
and with ability. We must think of the responsibilities and see that this 
·. does not interfere with the legitimate day-to-day business of administration 
and of passing legislation. For the parliamentary system to function 
efficiently, it is essential to improve the quality of political life as a whole 
· and to keep it at a high level. And if it is allowed to deteriorate, then people's 

faith in democratic institutions will be eroded and functioning of demqcracy 
itself will suffer. 

Hon'ble Members often ask the Speake~ -0r the Chairman for protection. 
I do not know how many of them are protecting the Speaker when he is 
in need-0f it. 
I think Shri Mavalankar, alth<;mgh he was a great personality 
and functioned at a high level, did get far greate1· co,operation from the. then 
Parliament than is evident today. So, when we expect people to function 
well, let us give them the full opportunity of doing so, 

B. C. Roy 
. DR B1DHAN CHANDRA ROY seemed to be larger than life; toweririg above . 
most others-physically and intellectually. He rose to the highest reaches . 
in his chosen profession of healing as well as in national lifo as a whole. 
His bold and steadfast leadership in the freedom movement was a source 
of inspiration and strength to millions. 

As Chief Minister of \Vest Bengal, he bacame even more of a legend 
in defending national interest. He loved Bengal. He guided it with vision 
and eloquence, with administrative acumen and alertness through a specially 
difficult period. He was known for his generosity. 
I remember especially 
his sense of humour. He was my father'.s friend and we regarded him as 
one of our family . 

. On the occasion of the centenary of his birth, it is a priviiege to pay my 

personal tribute to this true 'Bharat Ratna'. 

Kamaraj Nadar 

SHRI KAMARAJ rs one of Tamil Nadu's gifts to our nation. 
Joining the 
freedom movement without 
the advantages of affluence or advanced 
education, he rose to the highest position in the Indian National Congress 

Message·sent on March 10, 1981 for the birth centenary celebrations of the late Dr Bidhan 
Chandra Roy, a noted physician, national leader and Chief Minister of West Bengal 
From message for the brochure brought out by the Tamil Nadu Congress Committee -
Charitable Trust seeking people's co-operation in building the Kamaraj Memorial Hall 
in Madras, March 15, 1981 

through his dedication and inexhaustible and selfless exertion in the cause 
of the people. He was a man of the people and his great asset was his · 
profound commonsense. As he identified himself with the good of the nation, 
so did the poor identify themselves with him. 

His vast experience at the grassroots level, his own direct understanding 
of the people's needs and his energy made him an able and effective Chief 
Minister. As President of the country's pl'emier political organization, 
he guided it to fulfil its historical role of holding the country together and 
of taking it forward along the path of democracy, secularism and socialism. 

B. R. Ambedkar 

. IN AMERICA THEY have the expression "From log . cabin 
House". Dr Ambedkar in our country has become the byword for a person 
from humble beginnings reaching the high eminence in national life-the 
Mahar lad who came to be hailed as the new Manu who rectified the injus-
tices of the earlier law-giver. His life also shows how much talent the 
nation had denied itself by practising the pernicious system · of caste 
discrimination down the centuries. Dr Ambedkar's achievements will 
remain an inspiration to all Indians. 

t~ the . White . 

Nargis Dutt 
I AM MOST deeply grieved to hear that Smt. Nargis Dutt has passed away 
after her long and heroic battle against agonizing pain and prolonged illness. 
To the millions who have seen her on the screen, Nargis was a symbol of 
high talent and dedication. She was a person of extraordinary warmth 
and sympathy and extended support to numerous social causes. Her 
friendly, vivacious face will long continue to cheer our people. 

Message sent on April 25, 1981 for the unveiling ceremony at Gwalior of a statue of the 
late Dr Bhimrao Ramji Arnbedkar a national leader and chairman of the committee that 
drafted the Constitution of India. 
Message of Condolence on the passing away of Smt. Nargis Dutt, a noted film actress and 
member of Rajya Sabha, New Delhi, May 3, 1981 

I lost a friend and co-worker of many years' standing. 

Durgabai Deshmukh 
I AM DEEPLY grieved to know that Shrimati Durgabai Deshmukh is no 
more. 
Shrimati Durgabai was an outstanding leader in the organization and 
co-ordination of social work. Her dedication, dynamism and perseverance 
were examples to all. From her earlier years she faced personal difficulties 
and took life as a challenge. She played a notable role in our struggle for 
freedom and in the movement for women's rights. She built up numerous 
organizations which gave self-confidence and employment to women, besides · 
serving the community. 

After freedom, as a lawyer, as a member of the Constituent Assembly, 

as Chairman of . the Central Social Welfare Board and · as a rnen1ber of · 
the. Planning Commission, Shrimati.Di.ugabai rendered inestimable service, 
Her capacity for work a1ld her single-mindedness will remain a legacy for 
Indian women. 

K. D. Malaviya 

FRIENDSHIP WITH THE Malaviya family dates back to my grandfather, 
Motilal Nehru, and Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya. Shri Keshav Dev 
was especially close to my father and my husband. 

He was a courageous freedom fighter, active for sixty years. His 

entire adult life was spent in the nation's service. 

He was a man of vision and indefatigable energy. Even during his 
final illness his preoccupation was with our technological progress and self-
reliance. Endowed with a restless mind, he was a dynamic minister in Uttar 
Pradesh and at the Centre. His progressive ideas earned him the ire of 
many traditionalists and he was subjected to much harassment. But his 
enthusiasm and warmth evoked staunch friendship and he earned the nation's 
gratitude by his perseverance in promoting indigenous oil exploration and 
production. The Government has decided to name the Institute of Oil 
Exploration in Dehra Dun after Shri Keshav Dev Malaviya. 

From condolence message on the passing away of Shrimati Durgabai Deshmukh, a noted 
social worker, New Delhi, May 10, 1981 
From condolence message on the passing away of Shri Keshav Dev Malaviya, a veteran 
leader and a former minister in the Central Cabinet, New Delhi, May 27, 1981 

The Congress and the country are deprived of a veteran leader who was 

always in search of new avenues, nationally and internationally. 

Zia-ur Rahman 
WE ARE SHOCKED at the tragic news of His Excellency President, Zia-ur 
Rahman's assassination. Oi1 behalf of the Indian Government and people 
and on my own behalf, I convey to Your Excel:lency, and through you to 
the friendly people of Bangladesh, our deepest sympathy at this great loss. 
I have always condemned the politics of murder. ¥le, in India, are 
It has been 

interested in the. stability and progress of onr neighbours. 
our privilege to welcome President Zia-ur Rahman in our country on more · 
than one occasion: · I recall niy own cordial meetings and discussions with 
him on a number of bilateral and international issues. 

President Zia-ur Rahman led his country with distinction, giving special 
attention to problems of development. His recent proposal for regional 
co-operation in South Asia revealed his vision. 

From the days of the heroic liberation struggle of the people of 
Bangladesh, our two countries and peoples are pledged to closer friendship 
and mutual co-operation. As neighbours, we have shared mo1nents of 
triumph as also of sorrow. 

The Indian people join 1ue in sending you and yoiir people our heartfelt 

condolences. 

Maharaja Ranjit Singh 
WE ARE GATHERED here to honour a man who was indeed remarkable. 
We have come to pay tribute to one of the outstanding men of our national 
history, a warrior and a statesman born 200 years ago, whose memory will 
live for hundreds more. He wore the Kohinoor. That beautiful stone 

From letter sent from New Delhi on May 30, 1981 to the Acting President of the People's 
Republic of Bangladesh, condoling the passing away of President' Zia-ur Rahman· 
Remarks made while releasing the book Ran/it Singh as Patron of the Arts, New Delhi, 
December 17, 1981 

HOMAGES, TRIBUTES AND Rfu\'1INISCENCES 

is no longer in our count1y. But perhaps one can say that Ranjit Singh 
himself will remain a shining diamond in our history and legend. 

He was known for his courage, resourcefulness, profound common 
sense and, above all, for his capacity to hold people together. Even as a 
teenager he had to jump into the rough and tumble of war and statecraft. 
He learnt from life rather than from books. But his mind, like that of Akbar, 
was exceptional. He had an amazing capacity to understand and to relate. 
So also was his curiosity and range of interests. 

The book that I released today, I believe, deals with one aspect of his 
personality-his patronage of the arts. But we should keep in mind also 
other aspects which have great importance. He was a good Sikh but he 
had the best of relations with people of all other religions. 

It is customary to find a link with whatever one 

India's tradition is one of assimilation. This is especially true of Punjab 
and the Punjabis. 
is 
speaking about. Dr Mulk Raj Anand has already spoken about my own 
link through my grandmother with Punjab. - Apart from that, I also have 
· a daughter-in-la\v from · Punjab. · The State_ has gone through traumatic 
experience in its history. It was reborn after partition, converting difiicuity 
into challenge and adversity into· opportunity. To the rest of our country 
it is an example of enterprise, in agriculture and industry, and 
indeed 
in life in general. 

Enterprise is an attitude of mind. 

It means creating opportunity and 
not merely taking advantage of it. The Punjabis, Sikhs as. well as Hindus, 
are found in all parts of India. 
In fact, they are dominating many areas of 
national life. They are accepted .everywhere because of their enterprise, 
their resourcefulness, their outgoing character and their tremendous hard 
work. 

In our country we have the fullest opportunities open to Sikhs, Muslims, 
Christians and Hindus in private and in public sector, in civilian and in 
military life. 
In Punjab, as elsewhere, what is .needed is an atmosphere 
of unity and a spirit of secularism. Secularism. in our country never n1eans 
opposition or indifference to religion but the recognition that people of all 
religions have equal protection, equal respect, equal opportunities, and 
along with them equal responsibilities. 

Marg has been known for its excellence. 

It was a good idea on the 
part of Marg to produce this book on Ranjit Singh. It has been well executed. 
I am glad to release the book. 

Let Ranjit Singh's spirit of self-confidence, courage, 

tolerance and 

heroic good humour guide us all in our activities. 

Personal Viewpoint 

QUESTION : Madam, I would like that we speak first about the things you 
like in life outside politics. 

PRIME MINISTER : I do not divide life into compartments. This has really 
to do with our philosophy. Our philosophy teaches us to accept life as it 
is and realize that life is a mixture of good and bad; of the pleasant and the 
I do not say that I 
painful. We should accept both in an equal way. 
always do it but such an attitude certainly helps in meeting situations. You 
have asked me what I like. 
It is easier to say what I don't like than what 
I like. Well, I have always loved the vvorld. When I was a child and heard 
people.talk about-the inoonand moonlight,_which were supposed to be.very. 
romantic; I always· used to say, "This world is beautif'ul,- \~hy do you want 
to look at the moon?" · I still remember it. 

I like trees; greenery, flowers, but if I have to choose between having 
. trees and flowers I would have trees. They are comforting to the eyes. Their 
colour, especially because of the glare here, may be a reason for that. 
do not know. Then I like music and dancing. 
I like 
animals. 

like children. 

QUESTION 

: Can I have clear instances? 

PRIME MINISTER: If I have a free day and there is any exhibition, wheth1:1r 
it is art or something like, I always go-no matter how much else there 
is 
to be done. 

QUESTION : What have you recently seen and liked? 

PRIME MIN~STER : I don't think I have seen any exhibition in the last few 
days. 
'Ne had an evening of quite a different kind : it consisted of songs 
sung during our freedom 1novemeut. And that was very moving for me 
because many of these songs we had sung ourselves but had forgotten. 

QUESTION : Is music an important thing for you? 

PRIME MINISTER : \Vell, it was very important at one time. Then for some 
years I did not listen to music much. But now I am listening again. 

Interview with Mrs. Marianne Lohse of the French newspaper Madam Figaro, New Delhi, 
October 13, 1981 

QUESTION : What, for example? 

PRIME MINISTER : It depends. Suppose I am working; then I want something 
I like some of the 
that is very light. It really depends on one's mood. 
conte1nporary music, too. 

QUESTION : French composers, for instance? 

PRIME MINISTER : I don't know much about French. 

QUESTION : Which flowers do you prefer? 

PRIME MINISTER : Well, I like wild flowers more than garden flowers. But 
if a flower is very beautiful, one likes it. You know, it is so difficult.to say 
what.you like. It depends· upon the specimen and the environment in ~1hich 
· you see it. But I think I like wild flowers because of the qualities which 
I like iii humlln beings: · they. grmv in such. adverse circumstances. You · 
see a· wild. flower growing where . there is tremendous wind and odds are 
against, yet it blossoms on its own, especially in the mountains. 

QUESTION : Animals 'I You had tiger cubs, isn't it? 

PRIME MINISTER : \Vhen my children were small, they had practically every 
animal-tiger, panther, crocodile. Now we have some dogs-· four dogs. 
two of whom are very old. But I don't have any of my own. Each of my 
sons had two each. 

QUESTION : Can we speak of your grandchildren? Do you ~cupy yourself 
much with them? 

PRIME MINISTER: Well, I can't say I have the time to occupy myself with 
them, but if I am with them, I havethetime, provided they have the time-
you know children are very busy people. My grandson, while we were 
away, took part in some riding competitions and won quite a number of 
silver cups; and his sister is very angry because she could not take 
part. 

QUESTION : The youngest one is one and a half years old; isn't it? 

PRIME MINISTER : Yes, he is about a year and a half. My daughter-in-law 
packed him offto school today. He cannot even speak properly. They 
said they would try out for an hour everyday. 

QUESTION: What do you do with them, Madam? 

PruME MINISTER : Now, well, sometimes we read or we talk or we play games. 

QUESTION : For example? 

PRIME MINISTER : Verbal games or something. Now, yesterday at dinner, 
suddenly they said let us see how many words we know which begin with 
'so', not proper nouns. So, different types of games. 

QUESTION : I suppose you have a particular affection for the youngest? 

PRIME MINISTER : No, I think I like all children. 
children, too. Today, I had two schools visiting me. 

I like other people's 

QUESTION :. What is your rhythm of life? 

PRJME :tv1INISTER. : Well, my rhythm is absolutely disrupted just now because 
J have notyet got over the jet lag of my recent trip. I am still feeling sleepy . 
. at the wrong times. But otherwise, I don't have set habits. Sometimes 
I feel like working at night, so I work at night, or I may get up at three in 
the morning. 

QUESTION : You are not imposing on yourself a very rigid timetable? 

PRIME MINISTER : No, there is a schedule. For instance, I always come 
to office by ten. Before coming here, I have an hour and a half, which is 
free time to me, for anybody who comes. Today, 
there were students 
visiting us. And there may be farmers or they may be people with grievances 
or women or industrial workers. Vve have a plan for what we call workers' 
education. They take workers to various parts of the country. They go 
and see other fac'tories of the type in which they are working. 
If they come 
to Delhi, they come and visit me. 
It is the same with farmers and women's 
organizations. So usually I am ready by half past seven-after reading 
the newspapers and looking at the work that had accumulated during the 
night. Some political people also come and see me at my house. 

QUESTION : It is said that at times you do not even have breakfast. 

PRIME MINISTER : Well, I have given up that because I found that I was 
I then go to the house next 
eating too much, not because of lack of time. 
door. My house is very small. So, next door, we have a house for meetings. 
I am there from about a quarter past eight to ... I try to finish by 9.30 but· 
it doesn't always finish. 

QUESTION : They say that you voluntarily live a simple lifo? 

PRIME l\1JNISTER : Yes, I prefer simple life. 

QUESTION : You have quite a small house? 

PRIME MINISTER : It is a tiny house, I have no choice. I would very gladly 
move into a bigger house. We are so squeezed, we have no place to put 
I have a wall full of books but 
our things, especially no place for books. 
they are all over the floor as well. 

QUESTION : \Vhat do you do to maintain your figure? 

PRIME Iv1INISTER : I do a little bit of exel'cise. 

QUESTION 

; Everyday? 

Just ten minutes or so. But sometimes 
· PRIME MINISTER : \Vell, most days. 
l do twice a day:_ If 1 am very tired, I do exercise in the evening because 
I find that. it helps rrie to relax and to go to sleep. 

QUESTION : Do you do Yoga? 

: No, it is a mixture. 1 pick them up som.etimca; from 
PRIME MINISTER 
magr..zines and I have made my own little set. At one time I used to collect 
exercises. 

\Vherever I saw a new exercise, I would try it. 

QUESTION: In magazines, .. 

PRIME . MINISTER : Yes, or anY)Vhere. 

QUESTION : '\Vhat do you reacf these days? 

PRIME MINISTER : I read several books all at the same time. I have recently 
been reading Galbraith's book. And because I went to Australia, I was 
reading a book 011 Australia. I am also looking at a book on the aboriginals 
of Australia. -I am very interested in and I get on very well with the tribal 
people and people who are spontaneous. 

QUESTION : Novels and things like that? 

PRIME MINISTER : Yes, sometimes. -

QUESTION : French literature also? 

PRIME MINISTER : Well, with difficulty. You see I read English very fast. 
I read French and I enjoy reading it but because I can't read it fast, I get 
a bit impatient. 

QUESTION : ·what have you read (in French) recently and liked'? 

PRIME MINISTER : Somebody has sent me a book which he has written in 
French-open letters to women in politics. 

QUESTION : \Veil? 

PRIME MINISTER : Well, you know, it is a very male point of view. 

QUESTION : \Vhat is your concept of political power? 

PRIME 1vIINISTER : I have no concept as such because I never understand what 
If you take our system here, 
people n1ean exactly by the word 'power'. 
the Prime Minister has far less powers than the President of France or the 
President of the United States or heads of the most of the developing 
··countries. There people ate very much more powerful. Here we have 
I mean 
tied ourselves with bureaucracy. • So many committees and so on. 
it is· not as if you can ci.o anything you like because you ai:e Prime 1vlinister. 
A.ll you can do is to set a pattern or give a direction. That also has to be 
approved by the Party and obviously it has to be approved by the people 
because otherwise they would not elect you. 

QUESTION : However, you have often said that when something was not done, 
you liked to do it ... 

PRrME Iv1INISTER : It is from the point of view of a housewife. 

QUESTION : Clean µp when the house is dirty? 

PRIME l'v1INISTER : Yes, it is the same thing in regard tothe country, though 
on a bigger scale. 

QUESTION 

: Isn't it that sometimes there is a feeling of being quite alone'/ 

It has nothing to do with 
PR!ME MINISTER : I think everybody is alone. 
your family or what you are doing. Some people hide it and try to smother 
it either by noise or what they call having fun or something like that. But 
I think everybody has a core of loneliness. 
I would say that I was far less 
lonely than most people I know because I have always got on very well 
with myself, perhaps, because I was the only child and quite happy inventing 
I do not feel I needed somebody to entertain me. And in those 
my gam.es. 
days even toys were much less than they are now. 

QUESTION : Yes, but it is one thing to be a child that has to play alone ... 

SELECfED SPEECHllS AND \VRlTINGS"OF ~NDIRA GANDHI 

P~ME MINISTER : No, I did have lots of cousins. What I am trying to say 
is that I didn't mind being alone. Now I see that a lot of children are so 
dependent on company that when they are alone they just say: "What shall 
we do?" I never had to pose that question to myself. I have always felt 
that there was not enough time to do all that I wanted to do, even as a 
child. I have never understood the phrase 'killing time'. 
I have always 
felt shortage of time. 

QUESTION : Occupying so important positions as you have been doing, did 
you never have a moment of void? 

PRIME MINISTER : No, it is very difficult to put those into words. As l 
said, you have spaces within you just as you have in the universe. Perhaps 
you saw in the papers two or three days ago, there are large voids in the 
universe ·which scientists had not thought of before and they are now very 
surprised to find these. I have always felt that within you., within a person, 
you have such voids, and you can retire into. them without disruptirig 
yourself. You may be doi1ig anything. ·You may be having a conversation 
or you may be in a crowd. But if you want to retire into yourself, you can 
retire and you can do almost anythingyou like, I mean, not tangible but with 
your mind. 

QUESTION : Is it an exercise that you are doing often? 

PRIME MINISTER : It is not a conscious thing. This is something that you 
are doing all the time in a way, and that is why you can't get tired because 
you are automatically relaxing yourself. 

QUESTION:· But when I was speaking of solitude I was meaning at a much 
higher level. .. solitude of power ... decisions taken ... 

PRIME MINISTER : One is doing it with one's colleagues, you are not doing 
them alone. 

QUEST~ON : In the Western countries they call yot1 a highly authoritarian 
woman. 

~ME MINISTER : It is not at all true. It 1s absolutely contrary to the 
truth. 

QUESTION : You reject this style of calling? 

P~MB MINlSJ'ER : There has been nothing in which my colleagues have not 
In fact, when we declared Emergency, it had never struck 
participated. 

me at all. 
you can do in this situation and you have to do something". 

It is the Law Minister and others who said, "Well, this is what 

QUESTION : When you banned strikes ... 

PRIME MINISTER : No, we have not stopped strikes. 

QUESTION : When you say that you are going to ban strikes ... 

PRIME MINISTER : Only in essential services. But it was not my decision. 
It came to the Cabinet from the concerned Ministry. 
It did not emanate 
fron1 me at all. All these proposals from the Ministries concerned come 
when we are all sitting together in the Cabinet. Everybody discusses the 
pros and cons, and we then together decide. This particular ·decision was 
brought by the Ministry of Industry but it had been talked over in the 
. Pa.rliament before because there were strikes. For instance, we had a 
strike in defence production which cost us not only a. lot of money but did 
a great deal of national harm. Similarly, if you have a strike in ports and 
docks at a time when you need something, it affects the lives of millions of 
people. 
l\1ost of these strikes are not of the labour. They are called, by 
leaders of political parties who occupy positions in the labour movement. · 
They are not worried about the interests of industrial labour. They are 
doing it for their own purpose, for what they think will bring them some 
gain. 

QUESTION : May we talk about the entry of your son into politics? What 
1s your ... 

PIUME MINISTER : No, I think it is the same position as of anybody else 
coming into politics. Why should it be different? 

QUESTION : Well, because it is a thing which the Indians talk about, including 
those who have the greatest admiration for you. They say that it is 
astonishing to see a dynasty establish itself? . 

· PRIME MINISTER : How do you say it is dynastic? Was it dynastic when we 
all were in prison? Which family in the world has had so many people in 
prison or given up 95 per cent of what they possessed? Then it didn't matter, 
did it? All my mother's family, all my father's family, the old and the young, 
nobody thought then that it was dynastic. Somebody has stoodfor election 
and won. What has it got to do with dynasty? In what country has it 
not happened? Have not people in England and France who are related to 
somebody stood for elections and won? 
I am not nominating anybody. 

QUESTION : Do you think that the youth which supported Sanjay is going 
to rally round Rajiv? 

It depends on him and them. 

I didn't 
PRIME MINISTER : I don'~ know. 
interfere with Sanjay and I am not interfering with Rajiv. But he is quite 
a different type of person from Sanjay. And, naturally, he has to make 
his own way. Now, most of the young people who were with Sanjay, are _ 
not so young. They have grown out of the Youth Congress, as you have 
to leave it after reaching a certain age. 

QUESTION : Do you expect quite a lot from the youth? 

PRIME MINISTER : Obviously, because they have to make the future. 

QUESTION : I would very much like that we now speak of women, and of 
population explosion and of the manner in which you think one day you 
will be able to control .it. 

that only 

: We can't. 

In India, yo11 know, the people are highly 
PRIME MINISTER 
individualistic. That is why we have said many times 
the 
democratic system, and no other system, can possibly work here. 
And our tradition of democracy is very, very old, pre-Christian era. Of 
course, it was of a different type. There were no parliaments of this kind. 
But they were assemblies of people who were chosen ·and they expressed 
their views. We used to have elected village councils which took decisions 
about the affairs of the community. With a very delicate and very personal 
subject like family planning, we have to try and persuade people. Fortun, 
ately, most of the women in our country are amenable to persuasion but 
their husbands are not. And the opposition here, the political opposition, 
sort of hooks on to instances of so-called coercion and try to make it a major 
thing against us and spread all kinds of absolutely ridiculous stories without 
any base or truth whatsoever. We have never believed in coercion. 
In 
every conference, at every place we have said that we don't want coercion. 
But we did say that people should try and motivate, that is; persuade people 
to go in for the programme. But the propaganda against us was that we 
wanted to sterilize everybody. 
I shall tell you two stories to show to what 
I have repeated them many times, and they 
extent people believed it. 
vividly explain what happened.. 
In Patna city, there were floods and there 
was danger of cholera. So we sent a team of doctors to give inoculations 
against cholera. The people would not take the inoculation because they 
said, "Oh! You have come to sterilize us'.'. Then, here in Delhi, we had 
a programme for giving the Triple Antigen, an injection given to small 
children against diphtheria, tetanus and whooping cough. We thought 
we would give it free to the children who went to municipal schools-because 

PERSONAL VIBWPO~NT 

th.ey come from poor families who can't give it on their own. When, on 
the day that was chosen for it, doctors went from school to school (the city 
was divided into sections so that it could all be covered in one day), parents 
rushed to .the schools and took away their children and said, "They were 
being sterilized!" Afterwards, one of the mothers whom I had never seen 
before and whom I have not seen since, came to see me--while I was. not in 
power-. and said: "Look, I have been to. college and I know there is no 
such injection, but at that time there was such an atmosphere built up that 
I just believed it and took away my child". So this propaganda did a lot 
of harm. Nevertheless, our family planning programmes have succeeded 
in preventing 29 1nillion births. And this propaganda was only in the North, 
in a certain belt. The programme was going on all right in the South. 
is greater 
Wherever the standard of living has 
industrialization, or much better agricultural production as in Punjab, or 
greater education as in Kerala-there the birth rate has gone down. 

improved-where there 

QUESTION : How do you hope to ... 

PRIME lv!INISTBR : You can't have the type of very stringent laws like those 
in China. There you can have only one child. 

QUESTION : You are campaigning for late marriages ... 

PRIME MINISTER : \Ve have been doing that. In the cities we find that people 
are automatically marrying late, girls go to work, and because of the rising 
prices men also like a wife who can earn. She is then more capable of looking 
after herself. But, I am affraid, in the villages we still have ... 

QUESTION : Y 01.i. say that the obstacle comes specially from men? 

PRIME MINISTER : We try to deal with it if there is a family problem. But 
it i: not merely to control population, but to have healthier and happier 
families. That is our slogan. We say two children. A boy and a girl 
are the ideal. One problem here is that traditionally people did not think 
that a family was complete unless there was a son. So, if they had a daughter, 
they kept on trying to have a son. But that, I think, is lessening now. 

QUEST~ON : The Indian women have extraordinarily different outlook 
depending upon the place they live in and the level of their culture. 

PRIME MINISTER : That is also with men. 

QUESTION: Yes, but it is more striking in CB,Se ofwo_rp.en, perhaps because 
they outnumber men. 

PR~ME MINISTER Only just a little bit. I think we are half and half : 
49 per cent to 51 per cent. 

QUEST~ON : Are they more fragile than elsewhere? 

PRIME MINISTER : Certainly not. They do the heaviest work. They do 
big heavy construction work, they do road-making and similar other hard 
work-these very delicate-looking, colourfully dressed women. 

QUESTION : Much is said about the problem arising out of dowry, about 
the women in whose cases accidents take place. 

PRIME MINISTER : It is a very limited problem really, but the Press plays. it · 
up. When you see that there are 683.7 million people, the number of ~uch 
cases is not that many. This happens only in some parts of the country. 

QUESTION : And what can .be done to prevent that? . 

. . PRIME MINISTER : One of Sanjay's programmes was to tryto convince young 

men to say that they would not take dowry. 
It was wol'kh1g .. We did not 
have these troubles at that time. Not a single case. But the Janata Party 
and all of them ridiculed these programmes. Now, all his programmes were 
really our national programmes. He had not thought them up; they were 
part of our national programmes. But he and other young people thought 
that these were something that they could themselves do, something not 
dependent on govermnent. 
It was fol' them to decide. Tree plantation was 
something they could do themselves without outside help. Or, say, keeping 
the city clean or litel'acy. They chose five such things, including family 
If young people who get mal'ried, decide not to have a child, 
planning. 
say, for five years, it makes an enormous difference. And if they decide 
it themselves, it is much easier than our telling them, "Don't do it". This 
not only involved young people in the country's future but also gave them 
a sense of responsibility. But aHthese were ridiculed by the Opposition and 
the whole programme did receive a very big setback in almost three and 
a half years. 

QUESTION : You hope to relaunch all that? 

PRIME MINISTER : Yes. Tree plantation has started in a big way and also 
family planning. 
I don't really know how far it has gone, but I know we 
are making an effort. 

QUESTION : Coming back to women, illiteracy is higher among them. 
If 
the evolution of women is done by a better education, isn't it a key to this 
problem? 

PRtME MINISTER : What has literacy got to do with it? 

QUESTION : Is that not a key to the problem? 

PRIME MINISTER : No. Because Indian women have taken part in the 
independence movement in millions. This is the only country where it 
happened, and they were not educated. But they understood the importance 
of independence. They were willing to sacrifice for it. · Today we do want 
literacy, we do want education, but I don't think that lack of it is affecting 
our growth or the participation of women. Some women who are 
uneducated get elected to village councils. They make good chairmen 
and they know the problems of the villages. They take decisions. And, 
then, we have social welfare work. Long, long ago, before I was in 
Government, I was involved in the Central Social Welfare Board. My father 
had set it up. We had a remarkable woman who was its chail'lllan-very 
dynamic. 
It was rerJly her. idea. Of course, lots of people were doing 
social welfare work in the country but mostlyin the cities, and they were 
. mostly the upper class women; although here and there we had persons from 
other strata too. Even dtiring the independence movement, Mahatma 
Gandhi laid great stress on what he called the.basic education (or constructive 
work), like rural development, spinning, leprosy work. He wanted that the 
peasant should be enabled to become more self-sufficient. He should be 
able to make his own cloth as well to earn money in his free time. At that 
time we used to take a pledge to use only hand-made things, first, so that 
we would not have to buy foreign goods, and, secondly, it would give 
ernployment to those who were very poor. And so social welfare of that 
kind had started even then. Actually, even before Gandhi's time, there were 
men who were interested in women's emancipation and had started move-
ments for women's education and various other things, like the giving up of 
purdah. But women really came out in large numbers in the freedom 
movement under the guidance of Mahatma Gandhi. Once they had come 
out, naturally, they stayed out. After freedom, the women did not go 
back; they took part in various developmental activities and in politics. We 
found that the social welfare work being done was very uneven. Some 
places had a lot, some places had nothing at all. That is why this Board 
was formed-The Central Social Welfare Board. 
I was its Vice-Chairman 
and the task was to help financially some of the voluntary organizations 
who were working to see how they could be given guidance or any other 
help they needed, and where no social welfare work was being done, to start 
the work. When we started, we had to choose local women. We had only 
women, except the accountants and one or two people like that. We found 
that just being given a responsibility gave these women tremendous self-
confidence and poise. And they did well. As my father wrote in his 
autobiography, even in the independence movement, when hundreds of 

thousands of men were being arrested, women came and took their place 
as presidents, treasurers, secretaries and so on. 

QUESTION : Lately what changes have been there for women in your country? 

PRIME MINISTER : It is changing all the time. 

QUESTION : In what manner? 

PR!ME MINISTER : The activities have increased. The number of those who 
are active has increased. 

QUESTION : Have you taken more women in your Cabinet? 

PRIME 1v1INISTER : I don't look at it that way. 
I don't see that here is a 
woman and, therefore, I must take her. I don't believe in tl,1.at. We try to 
see that \Vcime1i and ail nw minorities are represented. But,· by and large, 
.. ,ve try to· see the competence of the person,· not just whether it is ·a man or 
I would not advise a Chief Iviinister that he must appoint a wo~ian 
woman. 
even if there is not a competent one among those who have been elected. 
All competent people don't get elected. But I will tell you a story. 
It is 
quite an old story because it happened in 1955 or so. It was when my 
father was still Prime Minister and I was doing child welfare work. The 
Secretary, who I think was then a Dutchman, had come here and he went 
to a village on his own. He took a translator from his Embassy. He went 
on his own because he wanted to see whether all we were saying was right. 
The villagers had a little function for him and, after the function, he went 
round; .• He. saw two old men sitting under a tree. He asked them: "Do 
you think anything has changed after independence?" At that moment not 
much had changed. Now we are self-sufficient in grain, we have increased 
and diversified our industry, and made progress in ti1e field of atomic energy 
and all kinds of things. But at that moment we had not. We were just at 
the beginning. The old men thought for a moment and one of them said: 
"Yes, our· women and children have changed." That was in 1955. And 
he was asked: "In what way?" He said: "They have become much more 
alive." Then he was asked: "Do you think it is a good thing?" He 
said: "Yes, it is a good thing. When we look back we think what a pity 
it was that this had not happened before." Scene has changed even more 
now. An opposite trend has also come in. Once you have development 
of the contemporary type, you lose a lot of things which I think are valuable 
in any person-spontaneity, gaiety, village women bursting into song 
regardless of poverty or anything. Now they don't. 

QuEsrmN· : But India has always known how to preserve that ... 

ll I !t 

PRIME MINISTER : That spontaneity is going, I am sorry to say. We arc 
trying hard to keep it but these things cannot be kept artificially. 
It has to 
come from within. 

QUESTION : ls that an important thing for you'! 

PRIME J'viINISTER : yes. 

QUESTION: I would like that you speak of the women who have influenced 
your life ... 

PRIME MINISTER : I think one is influenced in some way or the other by 
everybody one meets. 
I would not say that important people influence 
you more than the unimportant people. 

· . QuEsnoN 
those ... ·. 

\Vho among the simple people, wh~m you meet· every day, are 

PRIMS ivirNISTER : No. All the time you learn something. 
\\/hen a group 
of peasants come or a group of women come, you give them something 
and you take something from them. 

QcBsno::-.; : Lately? 

It is something that 1s 
PRIME MINISTER : You can't pick out the thing. 
h.ippening ail the time, if you are open to influence. 
Jvfost people close 
themselves up. Now I have always been very open to anything that is 
happening around and that is why I feel relaxed whatever the C(_)mpany 
or wherever I am and I feel at home in any type of culture. 

QUESTION 

: Nevertheless ... 

PR~ME MINISTER : Amongst the women I think my mother was the greatest 
influence. Otherwise, I had some remarkable teachers. I don't know why-
it has nothing to do with 1i:le-all of them have lived to be practically a 
hundred years, and one died at 105 in Geneva recently. 

QUESTION: That is fine. 

PRIME M~NISTER : Yes. She wrote to me just a little while before she died. 
I went to Geneva and I wanted to visit her. She was in the old people's 
home. But we wel'e in Geneva for one day, and they said it would take 
45 minutes to come and 45 minutes to go and I just did not have that much 
time. So I .didn't go. But I wrote to her and she wrote to me asking: 
"Why didn't you come to see me?" 

QUESTION : What does death mean to you? 

PRIME MINISTER : We accept life as it is. Death is just an aspect of it. As 
I said before, life is a mixture of good and bad. At the same time we are 
taught that we must fight the bad and try to promote the good. · All our 
religious festivals have, as their theme or as their symbol, the victory of good 
over evil. Every religious festival has a story like that. 

QUESTION : Are meditation, religion, important things in your daily life? 

If you 
PRIME MINISTER: Well, it just depends what you mean by religion. 
mean rituals, I don't follow any ritual. But we believe that every living 
creature has inner strength and. we should try to develop it and strengthen 
it . 

. . QUESTION And you think you have been.· able to develop yours? • 

PRlME MINISTER : Well, not consciously. 

I haven't made an effort for it. 

QUESTION : Wnat important remains to be done in this so well-fulfilled 
life? 

PRIME MINISTER : I don't think I have not even started doing anything. 
You know there is a poem of Tagore. Most of Tagore's poems were in 
the form of prayers and there is one, which is very often quoted, which begins 
with: "Where the mind is free and the head is held high", and has as its last 
line: "Into that heaven of freedom, my Father, let.my country awake". 
Now, that is what I would like my country to be. 
I know that in ·my lifetime 
I can't do anything except take things a few steps forward. 
I can't complete 
anything. · Nobody can'. All we can do is to move forward in what we 
consider is the right direction. 

QUESTION : If you were to define yourself, Madam, would you say that you 
are a woman who tries to move forward, always? 

PRIME MINISTER: Well, I don't know whether avancer (French) is the right 
word. 
I was born in a family, in a place, and at a time which conditioned 
1ne as such. The whole atmosphere was one of how to get freedom for 
the country. The concept of freedom was not that of just removing a foreign 
power and having our own Government: it was that the individual should 
develop, that we should fight poverty and evil customs, superstitions, anything 
that held back the individual. Nobody ever said this in so many words but 
one was surrounded by this sort of thinking, conversations and atmosphere, 
and it became a part of one's being, and that journey never has an end. 

QUESTION: On the other hand, you have written that in every human being 
there is a part of knowledge and a part of superstition ... 

PRIME MINISTER : No. 
I said it in a different context because people are 
always talking about superstitions in India. So, what I said was that the 
Western world, the modern world, has its own superstitions and it keeps 
on making more of them. 
It may discard some of the old superstitions but 
it makes new ones. 

QUESTION : Yes, and you think that, sometimes, India keeps the old ones? 

PRIME M~NfSTER : India has lots of superstitions-old as well as new. But, 
because we have this philosophy of accepting life, we have found ways of 
getting around anything. 
I don't know whether. people still practise this, 
but in my childhood (not in our family but among many) there was a supersti-
. tion that you don't travel in a particular direction on Saturdays .. But did 
it prevent people from travelling on that day? · No, what they did was to 
tie up a little bundle and put it out on Friday and say, "I have al.ready 
started my journey". Then they would go on Saturday. So, you see, 
although they were superstitious, it did not stop them from functioning. 
One finds a way out somehow. 

QUJ!STION : But there is the famous story which the historians tell. The 
Independence Day was fixed for the 15th. · But in fact on the 14th because 
of the astrologers. 

PRIME MINISTER : No, it has nothing to do with astrologers. 
l don't know 
why it was done at midnight. Perhaps lhe idea l;iehind it was that it was 
the beginning of the day. 

QUESTION : But I thought Mountbatten was so preoccupied that he had ..• 

PRIME MINISTER : I know that my father was so dead against astrologers. 
And, Zimbabwe's freedom was also ushered in at midnight. So, it is a 
symbolic thing: a new day has started. 

QUESTION : Madam, do you consult astrologers? People say so ... 

PRIME MINISTER : No. No. Never. Never. Almost everything they say about 
me is false. 

QUESTION: Why? 

PRIME. MINISTER : Well, because people who have written have not taken 
the trouble to know me at all. Most of them have never met me, not even 

r-i ,. 

for half an hour. Some I have met for half an hour, and then they want to 
write about my life. 

QUESTION : Then what are the mistakes which you would like to correct? 

PRIME MINISTER : I can't pick up instances. Even what they said about my 
I have just sort 
school. 
of turned over the pages. And if I see something that is quite wrong. I 
ask myself: "Why should I read this?" and I put it away. 

I have not 1•ead any of these books completely. 

QUESTION : But what irritates you the most? 

PRIME MINISTER : If they want to write all these things, it is their business. 
It doesn't change me; 
I am what I am. So, I never read anything about 
me. · If I have that much time, I would rather read something more interes-
ting. And people, when they write, make such silly mistakes which can easily 
be checked. Now, somebody just sent ni.e a book . by 
lvioshe Dayan. 
Because there was a bit about his visit to India, they had m.arked and sent 
I opened it-because a paper-marker had been put there-and he said 
it. 
that we got independence at 7 o'clock in the morning because· of some 
pecuiiar thing-not astrologers but something else-and that is why the Red 
Fort ceremony, which he says takes place in a stadium, is always at 7 because 
we had independence at 7 o'clock. This is something which can be so easiiy 
checked. First, we had ou.l' freedom at midnight. Now, we have the cere-
mony in the morning because otherwise it is very hot. We used to have it 
even earlier in my father's time, but then the diplon1ats and others said, 
"Can't it be a little laterZ" And so we made it a little later. And if the sun 
is out, it is really very hoi at that time in August. And it is at the Red Fort 
not in a stadium. So, people just write something and then people copy 
from that book and it goes on and on. 

QUEST~ON : Are you a woman who has changed? 

PRIW.i.E 1vfrNISTER : I certainly hope so because if your experiences have no 
effect on you, then it shows you are not really living. You must change all 
the time, but the core within you should be something that is constant. You 
learn by your own mistakes. You are learning from what you see others 
doing and develop 

QUESTION : You are a woman who is much more sad, as the people said you 
were, since Sanjay's death? 

PRIME 1'1INISTER : Of course, it has affected me. But I think sorrow is as 
enriching an experience so far as ones personality is concerned, as happiness 

